
 - ENERGY AND WATER DEVELOPMENT APPROPRIATIONS FOR FISCAL YEAR 2023

[Senate Hearing 118-]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]


 
    ENERGY AND WATER DEVELOPMENT APPROPRIATIONS FOR FISCAL YEAR 2023

                              ----------                              

                                       U.S. Senate,
           Subcommittee of the Committee on Appropriations,
                                                    Washington, DC.

                       NONDEPARTMENTAL WITNESSES

    [Clerk's note.--The subcommittee was unable to hold 
hearings on nondepartmental witnesses. The statements and 
letters of those submitting written testimony are as follows:]
  Prepared Statement of the American Council for an Energy-Efficient 
                                Economy
    Chair Feinstein, Ranking Member Kennedy, and members of the 
subcommittee, the American Council for an Energy-Efficient Economy 
(ACEEE) appreciates the opportunity to provide written testimony on the 
appropriations and activities of the Federal agencies under the 
subcommittee's jurisdiction. ACEEE, a nonprofit research organization, 
develops transformative policies to reduce energy waste and combat 
climate change. With our independent analysis, we aim to build a 
vibrant and equitable economy--one that uses energy more productively, 
reduces costs, protects the environment, and promotes the health, 
safety, and well-being of everyone. While we strongly support funding 
for a wide variety of energy efficiency programs as detailed in a joint 
letter, this testimony focuses on more details on funds needed for the 
Department of Energy's Advanced Manufacturing Office (AMO) and other 
priority areas to further much needed industrial decarbonization 
efforts. For the Fiscal Year 2023 budget ACEEE recommends that funding 
for the Department of Energy's Advanced Manufacturing Office (AMO) be 
increased to $600 million from $416 million in FY22 to accommodate the 
more ambitious agenda of decarbonizing US manufacturing by midcentury, 
supported by the enactment last Congress of the Energy Act of 2020 and 
the Clean Industrial Technology Act. This goal also requires funding 
for industrial decarbonization activities in offices beyond AMO in 
light of the ongoing departmental reorganization. Thus we also seek 
$200 million for transformative technology adoption at the Office of 
Clean Energy Demonstrations (OECD) and funding for two programs within 
Manufacturing and Energy Supply Chains (MESC): $30 million for 
Industrial Assessment Centers and $40 million for the establishment of 
a Flex-Tech program.
    Advanced Manufacturing Office (AMO): $600 million to enable the 
research, development, demonstration and deployment of industrial 
energy efficiency and advanced manufacturing technologies. This level 
of funding is intended to accommodate an ambitious agenda of 
decarbonizing US manufacturing by the midcentury. This goal of dramatic 
reductions requires increases in activity levels across the office and 
some important changes in the orientation of the office's goals. AMO 
should expand its efforts from promoting energy efficiency to include 
reducing carbon emissions for manufacturing and reducing the embodied 
carbon in manufactured products more broadly. We expect DOE to release 
its long-delayed industrial decarbonization roadmap very soon, and as 
AMO rebuilds its staffing, the office should focus on adding expertise 
in important decarbonization technology areas identified in its 
research road mapping.
    While we support providing AMO increased flexibility in funding in 
order to reorient the office to the challenge of industrial 
decarbonization most effectively, we think the following programs and 
objective should be part of the office's direction and have included 
our estimate of FY23 funding needed:
  --Technical Assistance and Workforce Development:
    --Strategic Energy Management: AMO should promote Strategic Energy 
            Management practices and establish a program to provide 
            competitive grants to companies for the hiring or 
            designation of plant energy managers. Strategic Energy 
            Management is especially important for small and medium-
            sized manufacturing plants. ($15 million)
    --Save Carbon Now: AMO should expand the Better Plants program to 
            offer comprehensive assessments and engagements to the 
            1,500 largest energy using and greenhouse gas emitting 
            manufacturing facilities in order to address natural gas 
            shortages and assist decarbonization. These engagements 
            should include, but not be limited to, targeted assessments 
            of energy-saving and emissions reduction opportunities, 
            staff training, technical assistance and analyses, and 
            education. The enhanced Save Energy Now program run by the 
            Department of Energy from 2008 to 2011 achieved CO2 
            emissions reductions of about 1.8 million metric tons per 
            year and natural gas savings of about 98 TBtu per year.\1\ 
            ($55 million)
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \1\ Wright, A., M. Martin, and S. Nimbalkar. 2010. Results from the 
U.S. DOE 2008 Save Energy Now Assessment Inititive: [sic.] DOE's 
Partnership with U.S. Industry to Reduce Energy Consumption, Energy 
Costs, and Carbon Dioxide Emissions. Oak Ridge, TN: Oak Ridge National 
Laboratory. info.ornl.gov/sites/publications/files/
Pub25190.pdfaceee.org/research-report/ie2201.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    --Smart Manufacturing: AMO should support the development and 
            adoption of smart manufacturing practices (the use of 
            automated controls to achieve large process efficiencies) 
            directed towards small and medium-sized manufacturers. This 
            includes, but is not limited to, extending and expanded 
            funding for the Clean Energy Smart Manufacturing Innovative 
            Institute (CESMII) to increase educational and technical 
            assistance activities directed toward smart manufacturing 
            adoption. ($30 million)
  --Industrial Process Heat Decarbonization R&D: AMO should support 
        industrial process heating decarbonization through the 
        establishment of a research, development, and deployment effort 
        by AMO to promote the adoption of technologies that can 
        dramatically reduce the GHG emissions from process heating 
        applications, the largest source of industrial emissions.\2\ 
        ($55 million)
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \2\ Rightor, E., P. Scheihing, A. Hoffmeister, and R. Papar. 2022. 
Industrial Heat Pumps: Electrifying Industry's Process Heat Supply. 
Washington, DC: American Council for an Energy-Efficient Economy. 
aceee.org/research-report/ie2201.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    Office of Clean Energy Demonstrations (OCED): $200 million for 
transformative technology adoption through the establishment of a grant 
program that provides cost-share payments to manufacturing facilities 
that make the first at-scale implementations of transformative 
technologies to reduce GHG emissions in intensive manufacturing 
processes. The high cost of implementing new technologies at an 
industrial scale is a key barrier to the process transformations needed 
for competitive, decarbonized, domestic manufacturing.
Manufacturing and Energy Supply Chains (MESC):
  --Industrial Assessment Centers: $30 million for the Industrial 
        Assessment Centers (IAC) program to expand the program in order 
        to increase the number of university-based centers to 40; to 
        establish satellite centers at community colleges, technical 
        schools, and union training facilities; and to establish an 
        apprenticeship program with matching funding for IAC students 
        at facilities that have received assessments in the recent past 
        to facilitate the implementation of recommendations.
  --Flex Tech: $40 million for the establishment of a Flex-Tech program 
        that provides grants to States and Tribal governments partnered 
        with educational institutions and trade associations to provide 
        energy and greenhouse gas reduction assessments and loans to 
        implement identified measures at small and medium-sized 
        manufacturers.
    Thank you for the opportunity to share these recommendations, and 
please let us know if we can provide additional information.

    [This statement was submitted by Alexander Ratner, Federal Policy 
Manager, American Council for an Energy-Efficient Economy.]
                                 ______
                                 
           Prepared Statement of the American Nuclear Society
    On behalf of the 10,000 men and women of the American Nuclear 
Society \1\ (ANS), I am pleased to provide recommendations for fiscal 
year 2023 appropriations levels for nuclear programs under the 
subcommittee's jurisdiction. The American nuclear community is grateful 
to the Committee for its continued, bipartisan support for Federal 
investments to sustain our existing nuclear fleet and accelerate the 
near-term development and deployment of new nuclear energy 
technologies. Our recommendations are aligned toward a commercial 
scale-up of advanced nuclear reactors in the 2030 timeframe and 
consistent with the 2021 ANS report, ``The U.S. Nuclear R&D 
Imperative.'' \2\ For Fiscal Year, 2023, ANS recommends a minimum of 
$2.2 billion for Department of Energy (DOE) Office of Nuclear Energy 
(NE) programs. We recognize this level of funding will present a 
challenge to the committee given its current 302(b) allocation. 
However, the Russian invasion of Ukraine has laid bare the immediate 
U.S. national security interest in strengthening our nuclear supply 
chain and reducing our reliance on Russian sources of nuclear fuel and 
R&D capabilities.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \1\ The American Nuclear Society is the premier organization for 
those who embrace nuclear science and technology for their vital 
contributions to improving people's lives and preserving the planet. 
ANS membership is open to all and consists of individuals from all 
walks of life; including engineers, doctors, students, educators, 
scientists, soldiers, advocates, government employees, and others. ANS 
is committed to advancing, fostering, and promoting the development and 
application of nuclear sciences and technologies to benefit society.
    \2\ ANS Task Force on Public Investment in Nuclear Research and 
Development (Feb. 2021). The U.S. Nuclear R&D Imperative (pp. 1-39, 
Rep.) https://www.ans.org/file/3177/2/ANS percent20RnD percent20Task 
percent20Force percent20Report.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
                      doe office of nuclear energy
Directed R&D and University Programs
(Fiscal Year 2023 Recommendation: $161 million)
    ANS strongly supports the administration's request for this new 
programmatic structure, which consolidates NE funding for universities 
(and small businesses) into a unified program that will provide 
stewardship for university-based nuclear education programs, campus 
research reactors, and start-up companies. While still tightly aligned 
with Departmental missions, this new structure will eliminate the need 
to ``tax'' existing NE programs to provide the funding needed required 
for effective stewardship of nuclear education and research at U.S. 
universities.
    ANS STRONGLY opposes the inclusion of any congressional earmark in 
this account. While we are mindful of Congress' power of the purse, the 
inclusion of project-specific earmarks at this time would effectively 
gut this new program before it has a chance to become established, 
negatively impacting existing competitively awarded projects, and 
inflicting tangible damage to America's overall nuclear 
competitiveness.
Advanced Reactor Demonstration Program (ARDP)
(Fiscal Year 2023 Recommendation: $245 million)
    For fiscal year 2023 ANS recommends $140 million for Risk Reduction 
for Future Demonstrations, $85 million for NRIC, $15 million for 
Regulatory Development, and $5 million for Advanced Reactor Safeguards.
Advanced Nuclear Fuel Availability Program
(Fiscal Year 2023 Recommendation--$360 million: $300 million for 
        commercial enrichment and deconversion capacity and $60 million 
        for downblending of HEU)
    Consistent with the Energy Act of 2020, it is imperative that DOE 
establish a competitive commercial high-assay low-enriched uranium 
(HALEU) fuel supply chain in the U.S. The urgency is real. Russia can 
no longer be considered a feasible HALEU supplier. Without a reliable 
HALEU supply, lead commercial customers will be less likely to make 
commitments to build advanced reactors. We recognize the administration 
has not yet submitted a comprehensive plan to address HALEU needs, but 
there is increasing consensus within the U.S. nuclear community that a 
$300-400 million level of investment will be required to stimulate 
sufficient commercial interest. Therefore, ANS requests $300 million 
for fiscal year 2023 to support the deployment of a U.S. commercial 
HALEU supply chain and $60 million for the fresh HEU downblending 
bridge program.
High Enriched Uranium Recovery for HALEU (EBR-II)
(Fiscal Year 2023 Recommendation: $25.75 million)
    ANS recommends $25.75 million to transition EBR-II spent fuel 
processing operations in order to meet the increasing needs of 
industry.
Fuel Cycle R&D Fuel Cycle Laboratory R&D
(Fiscal Year 2023: Recommendation $35 million)
    ANS recommends not less than $20 million for metallic fuels and $15 
million for additional fuel cycle laboratory R&D.
Accident Tolerant Fuels
(Fiscal Year 2023 Recommendation: $165 million)
    ANS recommends $120 million for continued participation of the 
industry-led teams in the cost-shared R&D program including support for 
testing, code development, and licensing of ATF with higher fuel 
utilization. ANS also recommends $10 million to continue silicon-
carbide development and $35 million for laboratory specific work in 
support of ATF.
TRISO Fuel and Graphite Qualification
(Fiscal Year 2023 Recommendation: $37 million)


Versatile Test Reactor
(Fiscal Year 2023 Recommendation: $45 million)
    Currently, the only fast research reactor available is located in 
Russia. While the VTR may not be necessary for near-term licensing of 
certain advanced reactors, the Committee must recognize that a fast 
neutron irradiation facility remains mission critical for sustaining 
U.S. advanced nuclear energy in the long-term. We believe NE should use 
some portion of the requested funding to explore the potential cost 
savings of aligning VTR component fabrication with Natrium ARDP project 
and, in concert with the DOE Office of Science, assess opportunities 
for producing isotopes for which the U.S. currently relies on Russia 
for significant supply.
Light Water Reactor Sustainability
(Fiscal Year 2023 Recommendation: $62 million)
    ANS recommends $62 million to enable this program to accelerate LWR 
modernization efforts while continuing to support hydrogen 
demonstrations. ANS also requests that no less than $12 million be used 
to support new or previously awarded hydrogen demonstration projects.
Advanced SMR R&D Support
(Fiscal Year 2023 Recommendation: $211 million)
    Demonstrating the next generation of advanced light water small 
modular reactors will support both domestic deployment and export of 
U.S. technology and enable broad U.S. leadership in new technologies.
Nuclear Waste Disposal/Integrated Waste Management
(Fiscal year 2023 Recommendation: $53 million)
    ANS supports the requested level for these programs. We strongly 
urge the Committee to reject any attempt to limit DOE's authority to 
direct funding to particular States or localities. The U.S. is in the 
beginning stages of rebuilding a used nuclear fuel management program 
that has been dormant for far too long. Now is not the time to 
foreclose on any option which can help the U.S. manage its fuel 
resources more effectively.
Program Direction
(Fiscal Year 2023 Recommendation: $100 million)
    The management responsibilities that come with DOE NE program 
additions have increased substantially over the past several years 
while staffing levels have reduced and Program Direction funding has 
remained consistent. This convergence has created challenges in many 
areas, including contracting management and program execution. ANS 
recommends $100 million for fiscal year 2023 which will allow DOE NE to 
add experienced staff and address current staffing deficiencies.
Advanced Reactor Technologies
(Fiscal Year 2023 Recommendation: $70 million)
    The Advanced Reactor Technologies subprogram conducts essential R&D 
activities to reduce technical risks associated with advanced reactor 
technologies and systems. The subprogram R&D scope reflects input from 
advanced reactor stakeholders with a goal of enabling industry to 
mature and ultimately demonstrate advanced reactor technologies by the 
2030s. ANS recommends $70 million total for the subprogram, with $16 
million for the microreactor program and $20 million for the MARVEL 
reactor. The MARVEL reactor will support fuel acquisition and 
construction in fiscal year 2023. ANS also recommends $15 million for 
the ARC-20 program.
International Nuclear Energy Cooperation
(Fiscal Year 2023 Recommendation: $8 million)


               doe office of clean energy demonstrations
Advanced Reactor Demonstrations
(Fiscal Year 2023 Recommendation: $70 million)
    While passage of the 2021 Infrastructure and Jobs Act provided 
funding for the Advanced Reactor Demonstration Program (ARDP); the bill 
did not entirely fund both demonstration projects. ANS recommends an 
additional $70 million for continued ARDP support.
                         doe office of science
Isotope R&D and Production Program
(Fiscal Year 2023: $102 million)
    ANS strongly supports DOE's Isotope program and its missions to 
produce isotopes in short supply, manage DOE inventories of stable and 
long-lived isotopes, and conduct research and development activities on 
new isotope applications in medicine and industry. In addition to 
isotopes produced in DOE reactors and accelerators, there are new 
opportunities to use DOE legacy materials, such as strontium 90 for 
space and undersea applications, that were once considered waste. The 
DOE Isotope office should have the authority and resources it needs to 
facilitate the beneficial commercial use of these materials.
Low-Dose Radiation Program
(Fiscal Year 2023 Recommendation: $20 million to support low-dose 
        radiation research activities)
    Through recent congressional direction, the Department of Energy's 
Office of Science Biological and Environmental Research is to re-
establish a research program devoted to the human health effects of 
low-dose radiation at a funding level of no less than $5 million. To 
maintain progress in fiscal year 2023, and with the imminent release of 
the National Academies of Sciences guidance report on the development 
of a long-term strategy for low-dose radiation research in the U.S., 
ANS recommends $20 million for the program.
    Expanded funding will allow for new technologies and approaches for 
examining biological mechanisms by which ionizing radiation produces 
cancer and non-cancer health outcomes, and the integration of 
mechanistic biological insights with epidemiological data. This funding 
is also needed to support interdisciplinary training and integrated 
cross-professional research programs devoted to understanding and 
quantifying radiation health effects at low doses. The program will 
also support education and outreach activities to disseminate 
information and promote public understanding of low-dose radiation.

    [This statement was submitted by Craig H. Piercy, Executive 
Director/CEO, American Nuclear Society.]
                                 ______
                                 
      Prepared Statement of the American Society for Microbiology
    The American Society for Microbiology (ASM) appreciates the 
opportunity to submit outside witness testimony for the fiscal year 
2023 Energy and Water Development, and Related Agencies appropriations 
bill in support of increased funding for the Department of Energy 
Office of Science. The American Society for Microbiology (ASM) is one 
of the largest professional societies dedicated to the life sciences 
and is composed of 30,000 scientists and health practitioners. ASM's 
mission is to promote and advance the microbial sciences.
    The Department of Energy (DOE) Office of Science is a leader in 
advancing critical industries of the future, including quantum 
information science, artificial intelligence, high performance 
computing, advanced communications networks, future energy 
technologies, and engineering biology. As we rise to meet the 
challenges of the 21st Century, microbial science funded by the DOE 
Office of Science remains vitally important. ASM urges Congress to fund 
the DOE Office of Science at $8.8 billion in fiscal year 2022, an 
increase of 18 percent above fiscal year 2022 and consistent with the 
bipartisan House and Senate DOE Science for the Future Act.
    Funding from the DOE Office of Science through the National 
Laboratories, universities, and other programs has generated some of 
our most economically important innovations and is the primary driver 
of basic research, including critical areas of genome-scale, 
quantitative analysis of microbial research. This support has enabled 
researchers to use microbes to solve energy and environmental problems, 
and to bring those solutions to scale by developing empirical, 
computational, and mechanistic modeling tools.
    Office of Science funding led to the creation of the Bioenergy 
Research Centers, which support research into viable and sustainable 
domestic biofuel and bioproducts industries. Each of the four Centers 
is led by a DOE national laboratory or university, and each takes an 
innovative approach to improving and scaling up advanced biofuel and 
bioproduct production processes. Recent investments in the Joint Genome 
Institute and the National Microbiome Data Collaborative will lead to 
more effective analysis of microbiome data and better coordination of 
multidisciplinary microbiome research across the Federal Government. 
DOE National Laboratories were effectively deployed in the fight 
against COVID-19, using their supercomputing and modeling capabilities 
to both understand components of the virus and to find drug compounds 
to treat it. Thousands of projects funded by NIH (National Institutes 
of Health) and NSF (National Science Foundation) utilize DOE facilities 
each year, and more than fifty Fortune 500 companies and many small 
businesses use these facilities to conduct the underlying research 
required to develop innovative technologies and products that drive the 
economy, including the growing bioeconomy.
Microbial Research is Needed to Face 21st Century Challenges
    Our society faces several large, complex, and interconnected 
challenges, many of which can be addressed through microbial research. 
Inexpensive renewable sources of energy, fuels, and chemicals are 
essential for continued economic growth, but the environmental 
tradeoffs of increased energy production must also be considered. 
Microbial science funded by DOE Office of Science can lead the way in 
developing sustainable strategies to feed an ever-growing population by 
increasing plant and agricultural productivity and quality; by 
providing strategies to ensure that future U.S. citizens enjoy clean 
air, water, and a high standard of living; in transforming human health 
by providing everything from new pharmaceuticals, reagents for 
precision medicine, and next generation antibiotics; and by producing 
cost-competitive fuels, chemicals, and materials from abundant 
renewable resources. These and other advances in decarbonization, the 
production of biomaterials or bio-based polymers, and others based on 
new microbial catalysts will only happen with strong, stable 
investments in the Office of Science.
    The Office of Science currently funds four Bioenergy Research 
Centers (BRC), which support research into viable and sustainable 
domestic biofuel and bioproducts industries. These four Centers are 
developing viable and sustainable domestic biofuels and bioproducts 
derived from non-food plant biomass, such as poplar, switchgrass, and 
sorghum. This research will lead to lower greenhouse gas emissions, 
bring jobs to rural areas, and boost our energy security, and we 
strongly encourage Congress to continue fully funding the Bioenergy 
Research Centers.
DOE-Funded Microbiome Research Spurs Innovation
    In its stewardship of innovation at DOE's National Laboratories, 
universities, and other programs, the Office of Science is a critical 
partner in advancing areas of national need, supporting research in key 
emerging areas including artificial intelligence and microbiome 
research. The Biological and Environmental Research (BER) Directorate 
at DOE explores the frontiers of genome-enabled biology, deepens our 
understanding of physical and biogeochemical Earth processes, and 
enables innovation and discovery through their user-facilities. Funding 
is crucial not only for the continuation of research for existing 
programs within the BER, but also for new initiatives such as the 
National virtual climate lab and the Biopreparedness Research Virtual 
Environment (BRaVE).
    Microbiome science aims to advance understanding of microbial 
communities (microbiomes) for applications in areas such as health 
care, food production, and environmental restoration to benefit 
individuals, communities, and the environment. Scientific understanding 
of the microbiome has evolved significantly since the concept of the 
human microbiome emerged two decades ago. We now know that microbial 
communities exist everywhere, making the microbiome relevant to all 
living things. Yet, there remains much to discover regarding how 
microbiomes function as communities, interact with their hosts and 
environment, and their overall potential to improve health and 
ecosystems. The rapid pace of discovery has led to greater technology 
needs and data sharing infrastructure.
    The Interagency Strategic Plan for Microbiome Research, fiscal year 
2018-2022, developed by the Microbiome Interagency Working Group 
(MIWG), provides recommendations for improving coordination of 
microbiome research among Federal agencies and between agencies and 
non-Federal domestic and international microbiome research efforts. The 
5-year Strategic Plan coordinates microbiome research activities across 
21 government agencies, describing the interagency objectives, 
structure and operating principles, and research focus areas. As noted 
in the Interagency Strategic Plan for Microbiome Research, microbiome 
data is ``Big Data,'' which requires consistent and reliable database 
and resource coordination to facilitate data collection, analysis, 
interoperability, and data sharing. The NMDC (National Microbiome Data 
Collaborative) is aimed at empowering this type of microbiome research. 
Spearheaded by Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, in partnership 
with Los Alamos, Oak Ridge, and Pacific Northwest national 
laboratories, the NMDC is leveraging DOE's existing data-science 
resources and high-performance computing systems to develop a framework 
that facilitates more efficient use of microbiome data for applications 
in energy, environment, health, and agriculture.
    Our nation's ability to make significant advances in solving energy 
and environmental problems depends on advances in the microbial 
sciences. This will only be possible if Congress continues its 
commitment to robust and sustained funding increases for the Department 
of Energy's Office of Science.

    [This statement was submitted by Allen Segal, Director of Public 
Policy and 
Advocacy, American Society for Microbiology.]
                                 ______
                                 
     Prepared Statement of the American Society of Plant Biologists
    On behalf of the American Society of Plant Biologists (ASPB), we 
submit this written testimony to support $8.8 billion for the 
Department of Energy's (DOE) Office of Science in fiscal year 2023. 
Within this amount, ASPB supports proportional increases in funding for 
the Office of Basic Energy Sciences (BES) and the Office of Biological 
and Environmental Research (BER). ASPB also supports at least $575 
million for the Advanced Research Projects Agency-Energy (ARPA-E) in 
fiscal year 2023.
    The following testimony highlights the importance of biology-
particularly plant biology, which is a major backbone of efforts to 
enhance bioenergy production-as the Nation seeks to address energy 
security and other vital issues. We thank the subcommittee for its 
consideration of this testimony and for its support for the basic 
research mission of the DOE Office of Science.
    ASPB, founded in 1924 as the American Society of Plant 
Physiologists, was established to promote the growth and development of 
plant biology, to encourage and publish research in plant biology, and 
to promote the interests and professional advancement of plant 
scientists in general. ASPB members educate, mentor, advise, and 
nurture future generations of plant biologists; they work to increase 
understanding of plant biology, as well as science in general, in K-16 
schools and among the general public; they advocate in support of plant 
biology research; they work to convey the relevance and importance of 
plant biology; and they provide expertise in policy decisions world-
wide.
Fuel, Food, Environment, and Health: Plant Biology Research and 
        America's Future
    Plants are vital to our very existence. They harvest sunlight, 
converting it to chemical energy for food and feed; they take up carbon 
dioxide and produce oxygen; and they are essential to life on Earth. 
Indeed, plant biology research is making many fundamental contributions 
in the areas of domestic fuel security and environmental stewardship; 
the continued and sustainable development of better fuels, foods, 
fabrics, pharmaceuticals, and building materials; and in the 
understanding of basic biological principles that underpin improvements 
in plant growth and home-grown energy sources for all Americans.
    Plant biology is at the center of numerous scientific breakthroughs 
in the increasingly interdisciplinary world of alternative energy 
research. For example, researchers at National Renewable Energy 
Laboratory (NREL) published research that demonstrates the ability to 
convert wet waste carbon (food waste derived from fatty acids) to 
sustainable aviation fuels-highlighting the potential to meet aviation 
needs and environmental challenges. Similarly, with the increase in 
plant genome sequencing and functional genomics, the interface of plant 
biology and computer science has become essential to our understanding 
of complex biological systems, ranging from single cells to entire 
ecosystems. This research is critical for our future in bioenergy 
production.
    Even though foundational and mission-oriented plant biology 
research-the kind of research DOE funds-underpins vital advances in 
practical applications in energy, health, and the environment, plant 
scientists have had to maximize and leverage modest Federal funding to 
understand the basic function and mechanisms of plants. Strong 
investments in plant biology research are important considering the 
significant positive impact crop plants have on the Nation's economy 
and in addressing some of our most urgent challenges, like energy and 
food security. For example, continued basic and applied research in 
fields like synthetic biology will enable the creation and production 
of more energy dense, carbon neutral fuels and expand the production of 
energy-efficient biomass.\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \1\ https://roadmap.ebrc.org/energy/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Securing the Plant Science Talent Pipeline
    As discussed above, many of the challenges brought by a changing 
world will be addressed specifically by plant scientists. A significant 
increase in crop productivity will be needed to match the demand for 
food expected from the rate of population growth. At the same time, 
climate change will present new trials for crops and other plant 
ecosystems. These challenges will require efforts to increase 
productivity beyond current practices, including improvement in crop 
water use efficiency and enhanced crop photosynthesis efficiency and 
performance, to name just a few approaches. More knowledge and 
innovation will be needed to replace chemicals from non-renewable 
sources (from fuels to biomedical applications) with plant-derived 
metabolites. These types of innovations will require contributions from 
basic and applied plant science fields and collaboration from other 
sciences and engineering.
    To tackle these challenges, a strong and diverse community of plant 
scientists, with increased involvement from women and minority 
scientists, will be needed. However, the current training pipeline is 
not primed to ensure the availability of this workforce. Plant science 
doctoral degrees, both basic and agronomy-related, have remained 
stagnant over the past two decades. A strong investment in plant 
science research, both basic and applied, renewed efforts to transform 
public perception of plant biology and plant biologists, and a push to 
increase the number of students entering the pipeline leading to plant 
science degrees are necessary to change these trends. Developing the 
workforce that will contribute the solutions to future challenges is 
urgent. With this need in mind, ASPB applauds the awards DOE has made 
in training the next generation of scientists. However, more efforts, 
including outreach to and investments in women and minority 
researchers, is vital for the US to maintain its energy leadership.
                          doe recommendations
    Because the ASPB membership has extensive expertise and 
participation in the academic, industry and government sectors, ASPB is 
in an excellent position to articulate the Nation's plant science 
priorities as they relate to fundamental plant biology and, 
specifically, with respect to recommendations for bioenergy research 
funding through DOE's Office of Science.
    The BER and BES programs within the Office of Science are crucial 
to understanding how basic biological processes work. Sustained funding 
for these programs is vital because the discoveries made in these areas 
will ultimately be the foundation for the next fuels and technologies 
we use in our daily lives. Support from ARPA-E is critical to advancing 
plant synthetic biology technologies, and ASPB implores the committee 
to include sustained, targeted funding for synthetic biology research 
in the program.
    In addition:
  --We commend the DOE Office of Science, through its programs in BES 
        and BER, for having funded the Bioenergy Research Centers and 
        the Energy Frontier Research Centers. ASPB strongly encourages 
        additional funding for the DOE Office of Science that would 
        specifically target funding toward individual and small-group 
        grants for bioenergy and plant growth research.
  --Considerable research interest is now focused on processing plant 
        biomass for energy production. Fundamental discoveries of the 
        genes that control plant growth and enable plant growth in 
        response to stresses, including drought, are needed to secure 
        our energy future. If biomass crops, including woody plants, 
        are to be used to their full potential, extensive effort must 
        be expended to improve our understanding of their basic biology 
        and development, as well as their agronomic performance and 
        conversion efficiency in processing to fuels and high-value co-
        products. Therefore, ASPB calls for DOE to support research 
        targeted at efforts to increase the utility and agronomic 
        performance of bioenergy feedstocks, both in the field and for 
        their end users in the bioeconomy.
    Thank you for your consideration of our testimony on behalf of the 
American Society of Plant Biologists. For more information about the 
American Society of Plant Biologists, please see www.aspb.org.

    [This statement was submitted by Crispin Taylor, CEO, American 
Society of Plant Biologists.]
                                 ______
                                 
  Prepared Statement of the Assiniboine and Sioux Rural Water Supply 
               System and Dry Prairie Rural Water System
                         bureau of reclamation
1. Fiscal Year 2023 Budget Request
    The Assiniboine and Sioux Rural Water Supply System and Dry Prairie 
Rural Water System respectfully request fiscal year 2023 appropriations 
of $6.808 million, part of the Bureau of Reclamation Rural Water 
Program (Table 1).
    The fiscal year 2023 Federal funding request is $1.799 million for 
the Assiniboine and Sioux Rural Water Supply System (ASRWSS) and $5.009 
million for the Dry Prairie Rural Water System (DPRWS) to fully 
complete project construction at a combined cost of $6.808 million, 
including projected 5 percent inflation during fiscal year 2022. The 
request completes all elements of the Fort Peck Reservation Rural Water 
System, Montana, (PL 106-382, October 27, 2000). Future requests will 
be limited to inflation on projects initiated in fiscal year 2023 and 
fiscal year 2024 that are not covered by the 5 percent projected 
inflation in fiscal year 2022.

                                 TABLE 1
FY 2023 FUNDING REQUESTFORT PECK RESERVATION RURAL WATER SYSTEM (PL 106-
                                  382)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                 Sponsor/Project Feature                      Federal
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Assiniboine and Sioux Rural Water Supply System
    Complete Project Improvements.......................       1,798,886
                                                         ---------------
        Subtotal........................................      $1,798,886
Dry Prairie Rural Water System
    Outlook Branches....................................       5,009,199
                                                         ---------------
        Subtotal........................................      $5,009,199
                                                         ---------------
Total...................................................      $6,808,085
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    The project expresses the greatest appreciation to the Chair and 
subcommittee for their unwavering support during the construction of 
this vital infrastructure in a vast area of Montana only slightly 
smaller than the state of Massachusetts.
2. Project Status and Funding Needs
    The project was greatly assisted by fiscal year 2022 appropriations 
of $17.191 million and fiscal year 2022 allocations of $39 million by 
the Bureau of Reclamation from the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law (BIL) 
as shown in Table 2.
    Considerable project inflation through fiscal year 2021 in PVC pipe 
material prices, an increase of more than 100 percent, triggered a re-
pricing of the project by the Reclamation Technical Service Center in 
Denver. The re-pricing was completed on March 31, 2022, and resulted in 
an increase in the authorized construction ceiling for ASRWSS from 
$220.026 million to $229.456 million or an increase of $9.430 million. 
Similarly, the authorized construction celling for DPRWS was increased 
from $132.367 million to $172.617 million an increase of $40.250 
million of which $30.950 million was Federal and $9.660 million was 
non-federal.
    After applying funds as shown in Table 2 to all remaining projects 
in fiscal year 2022, a cost of $6.484 million remained to complete both 
projects within the Reclamation-adjusted authorized ceilings. That 
amount was increased by 5 percent for projected fiscal year 2022 
inflation to arrive at the request for fiscal year 2023 of $6.808 
million. PVC pipe material prices in fiscal year 2022 have soared an 
additional 19 percent.

                                                     TABLE 2
                      FUNDS NEEDED TO COMPLETE PROJECTS GIVEN FISCAL YEAR 2022 ALLOCATIONS
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
              Remaining Costs and Available Funding                   ASRWSS           DPRWS           Total
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
FUNDING TO COMPLETE PROJECTS
    TSC Remaining Project Costs (-15 percent for Design              $41,223,447     $83,698,704    $124,922,151
     contingencies+ TERO/GRT) and Post-October 201 remaining
     Costs in Master Plan.......................................
    Available Funding
        FY 2021 Carryover.......................................     $22,510,222     $29,123,079     $51,633,301
        FY 2022 Appropriations..................................      17,000,000         191,000      17,191,000
        BIL
            Initial Allocation..................................               0       7,000,000       7,000,000
            Reserve (Requires Concurrence of Boards)............               0      32,000,000      32,000,000
                                                                 -----------------------------------------------
        Subtotal................................................     $39,510,222     $68,314,079    $107,824,301
    Needed to Complete Remaining Projects
        Total...................................................      $1,713,225     $15,384,625     $17,097,850
            Federal.............................................       1,713,225       4,770,665       6,483,890
            Non-Federal.........................................               0      10,613,959      10,613,959
 
CEILING AND REPRICING AJUSTMENTS
    October 2021 Indexed Authorized Ceiling
        Total...................................................    $220,026,000    $132,367,105    $352,393,105
            Federal.............................................     220,026,000     100,599,000     320,625,000
            Non-Federal.........................................               0      31,768,105      31,768,105
    Re-priced Authorized Ceiling (From October 2021 Master Plan
     Adjusted for TSC Pricing)..................................
        Total...................................................    $229,455,857    $172,617,259    $402,073,116
            Federal.............................................     229,455,857     131,189,117     360,644,974
            Non-Federal.........................................               0      41,428,142      41,428,142
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

    The recognition, cooperation, collaboration, and focus of the 
Bureau of Reclamation at the National, regional, area, and project 
level were extraordinary during the inflationary crisis, and both 
projects are grateful.
    Note that the decisions by Reclamation on the allocation of fiscal 
year 2022 appropriations, BIL funding, and remaining work to be 
completed within both projects have been discussed extensively with 
Reclamation but are not formalized at the time of this writing. Table 2 
is based on the expectations of both projects based on discussions, but 
not formal allocations, which are still coming.
    With fiscal year 2023 appropriations as requested and future 
adjustments for inflation, both projects can be successfully completed 
as originally envisioned. Both projects will serve their water users 
with safe, adequate, and reliable water supplies for the foreseeable 
future without shortage in supply or deficiency in quality.








                                 ______
                                 
   Prepared Statement of the Association of State Floodplain Managers
    The Association of State Floodplain Managers (ASFPM) appreciates 
the opportunity to provide this Outside Witness Testimony for the 
Committee's record for the fiscal year 2023 Energy and Water 
Development Appropriations legislation. ASFPM has a membership of 
20,000 members, including members in 37 state chapters. Our members are 
largely State and local officials, but also include many engineers, 
planners, and other professionals supporting local communities' efforts 
to reduce flood risk and wisely manage floodplains and flood-prone 
areas within their jurisdictions. Our membership additionally includes 
members of research and academic institutions, and the insurance and 
lending industries.
    Recommendations in ASFPM's OWT testimony pertain to the following 
Corps of Engineers programs: Section 22 Planning Assistance to States 
(PAS) $15 million; Flood Plain Management Services (FPMS) $25 million; 
National Flood Risk Management Program (NFRMP), including Silver 
Jackets ($10 million), and support for planning and technical 
assistance for nonstructural, natural feature, and nature-based feature 
alternatives within all Corps flood risk management program planning, 
as emphasized in WRDA 2020; and support for two studies directed in 
WRDA 2007 Water Resources Priorities Study (Sec. 2032) and WRDA 2014 
Review of Emergency Response Authorities (Sec. 3029).
Increase Funding for Corps of Engineers Technical Assistance.
    ASFPM has long supported the technical assistance programs of the 
Army Corps of Engineers Civil Works Program. In these programs, the 
Corps of Engineers can provide expertise and assistance to communities 
in developing solutions to flood challenges that can help make major 
strides toward reducing flood losses--often at considerably less costs, 
and without multi-million-dollar taxpayer investments in large Corps 
projects. The Corps' technical assistance programs include: Section 22 
Planning Assistance to States (PAS) (WRDA 1974, (PL 93-251), as 
amended); Flood Plain Management Services (FPMS) (Section 206, 1960 
Flood Control Act (PL 86-645), as amended), National Flood Risk 
Management Program (NFRMP), and the Silver Jackets program. 
Appropriations for these programs are made through the Investigations--
Remaining Items section of the Energy and Water Development 
Appropriations.
    While these programs represent a relatively small portion of the 
total Army Corps budget, they provide a high return on investment. Many 
smaller jurisdictions, including lower-income and economically-
disadvantaged and rural communities that generally would never qualify 
for a major Corps project or be able to afford the long-term Operations 
and Maintenance costs for major projects, especially through provision 
of key technical assistance, can develop smaller projects which can 
utilize non-structural, natural, or nature-based features, or a 
combination of structural and non-structural measures. In addition, the 
Army Corps' Silver Jackets program has the special advantage of being 
able to bring together numerous other programs from within the Federal 
family as well as State and locally-based programs to assist in 
addressing flood-related challenges. Also, WRDA 2020 has enhanced FPMS 
authority (see Sec. 111) and has broadly encouraged the Corps to 
utilize these techniques and approaches in flood risk management and 
community resiliency. Silver Jackets especially is continuing to build 
key linkages across governments that enhance cooperative approaches.
    ASFPM members strongly urge that these technical assistance 
programs be funded at considerably higher levels than in the past. The 
fiscal year 2022 final appropriations included $9 million for Planning 
Assistance to States (PAS), $12 million for Flood Plain Management 
Services (FPMS) and $6.5 million for the National Flood Risk Management 
Program (NFRMP). The Silver Jackets funding is included in the funds 
for the NFRMP. We note that the Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act 
included a one-time $30 million and $45 million appropriation for PAS 
and FPMS, respectively, to increase Corps technical assistance 
capability in the short term. We would urge a base level of funding for 
PAS at $15 million, FPMS at $25 million, and $10 million for NFRMP in 
fiscal year 2023 to expand the use and availability of these important 
authorities and assistance.
    We also strongly recommend expanding Corps engagement with such 
programs for their major value in helping States and communities to 
reduce future losses due to flooding, especially where watershed 
development and effects of climate change are increasing flooding risks 
and costs. Many communities in many coastal and inland areas across the 
Nation are already experiencing and are anticipating increased 
flooding, erosion problems, and deteriorating water supplies from more 
frequent and intense rainfall events and coastal storms, rising sea 
levels, and increasing stormwater runoff and urban flooding from 
changing climate and land use changes in watersheds. To address these 
flooding problems, many communities need expert engineering, economic, 
environmental, and planning assistance and data to assess and help 
identify potential structural and/or non-structural solutions to their 
flooding problems.
    Many smaller communities simply cannot afford to maintain such 
expertise in their local governments on a permanent basis and can 
benefit greatly from Corps of Engineers technical support. We note that 
only a few Corps Districts across the country have made use of these 
opportunities to bring Corps expertise to their communities outside the 
context of major Corps construction projects. Large numbers of 
communities lack the advantage to tap Corps expertise and support where 
and when it is often most needed and would be helpful and beneficial. 
We urge that Corps technical assistance be prioritized with dedicated 
staffing in each Corps District. We would urge the subcommittee to 
consider report language supporting efforts at Corps Headquarters to 
educate Corps Districts regarding these programs and to encourage their 
use.
    National Flood-Related Study Provisions. We would also urge the 
subcommittee to provide funding for two important WRDA-authorized 
studies. The Corps' Water Resources Priorities Study, begun in 2016, 
but thus far not complete, will assess the Nation's flooding 
vulnerabilities across all regions of the U.S. and analyze the 
effectiveness of programs, authorities, policies, roles, and activities 
for flood damage and flood risk reduction. This unique study, 
originally authorized in WRDA 2007 (Section 2032) will provide Congress 
with a broad overview perspective of Federal flood risk reduction 
programs and trends, including ways to potentially reduce costs by 
improving the effectiveness, efficiency, and accountability of existing 
programs and strategies. We have clearly witnessed an enormous increase 
in the Nation's flood disaster impacts and costs. Average annual costs 
have grown from approximately $4 billion in the 1980's to $17 billion 
(2010--2018), and FEMA has recently estimated that total average 
national flood damages have risen (2009--2019) to $39.3 billion, 
including both coastal and riverine impacts. Obviously, some years have 
witnessed damages far exceeding these levels. ASFPM believes such a 
study may be even more necessary today than when it was first 
authorized.
    Additionally, for many of the same reasons, we would also urge the 
Committee to consider including funds for the Corps' Review of 
Emergency Response Authorities study, authorized in Section 3029(b) and 
(c) of WRDA 2014, including providing Congress and the public with 
required biennial reports on emergency repair and rehabilitation 
expenditures under the Public Law 84-99 program. We are increasingly 
concerned that there are many situations where Federal taxpayers are 
repeatedly paying for the same levee and other flood control project 
repairs, and where improved flood damage reduction plans, such as 
voluntary buyout plans, identification of floodways, and levee setbacks 
and realignments, are necessary. These actions can make room for 
increasingly large flood volumes being experienced and should be 
developed to reduce disaster costs and improve floodplain and 
environmental management, simultaneously.
    Once again, thank you for considering the views of the Association 
of State Floodplain Managers. If you have questions or would like 
further information, please contact Chad Berginnis, ASFPM Executive 
Director.

    [This statement was submitted by Chad Berginnis, Executive 
Director, 
Association of State Floodplain Managers.]
                                 ______
                                 
   Prepared Statement of the Business Council for Sustainable Energy
    Chairmen Leahy and Feinstein and Ranking Members Shelby and 
Kennedy:
    The Business Council for Sustainable Energy appreciates the 
opportunity to submit testimony in support of funding for the clean 
energy programs at the Department of Energy in the Fiscal Year 2023 
Energy and Water Appropriations Bill.
    The BCSE is a coalition of companies and trade associations from 
the energy efficiency, energy storage, natural gas, renewable energy, 
sustainable transportation and emerging decarbonization technology 
sectors. It includes independent electric power producers, investor-
owned utilities, public utilities, equipment manufacturers, commercial 
end users and service providers in energy and environmental markets. 
Founded in 1992, the coalition's diverse business membership is united 
around the revitalization of the U.S. economy and the creation of a 
clean, secure, and reliable energy future in America.
    The BCSE is pleased to have an independent small- and medium-size 
businesses initiative under its banner, the Clean Energy Business 
Network (CEBN). Together, the BCSE and CEBN represent a broad range of 
the clean energy economy, from Fortune 100 companies to small 
businesses working in all 50 States and over 350 Congressional 
districts. On a national basis, these industries support over 3 million 
U.S. jobs.
    Our organizations were encouraged to see Congress enact the 
Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act (IIJA), Public Law 117-58, to 
provide an influx of funding for clean energy and energy efficiency 
programs at DOE in areas such as weatherization and State energy 
programs, hydrogen hubs, and the new DOE Office of Clean Energy 
Demonstrations. Congress has recognized the United States of America 
must lead the world in clean energy and energy efficiency technologies 
to meet the need for energy security and grid reliability and safety, 
while boosting economic growth and reducing environmental impacts. 
While the IIJA investment is monumental, it does not negate the need 
for sustained, year-on-year increases to all of DOE's clean energy, 
energy efficiency, and innovation activities.
    We urge Congress to continue to adequately fund Department of 
Energy (DOE) clean energy programs for the offices of Energy Efficiency 
and Renewable Energy (EERE), Fossil Energy and Carbon Management (FE), 
Electricity Delivery and Energy Reliability (EDER), Advanced Research 
Projects Agency-Energy (ARPA-E) and other essential DOE clean energy 
programs. These Federal research development and deployment funds can 
be used to leverage business investment to accelerate deployment and 
emissions reductions in all sectors of the economy.
    The 2022 Sustainable Energy in America Factbook recently released 
by the BCSE and BloombergNEF shows that despite the lingering pandemic, 
global supply chain bottlenecks, rising inflation, and considerable 
uncertainty in 2021, the clean energy and energy efficiency transition 
continued, with a record-breaking year for deployment of renewable 
power, battery storage and sustainable transportation, and an 
unprecedented injection of new capital into companies, technologies and 
projects. We encourage you to build upon this momentum with sustained 
support for clean energy programs in fiscal year 2023.
    The Council welcomes the opportunity to share information from the 
Factbook and we look forward to working with you throughout the fiscal 
year 2023 budget cycle. Please feel free to reach out to Ruth McCormick 
at [email protected] with any questions.
    A document containing fiscal year 2023 clean energy industry 
funding requests for BCSE members in the renewable energy, energy 
efficiency, energy storage, and natural gas sectors can be found here 
for your reference.

    [This statement was submitted by Lisa Jacobson, President, Business 
Council for Sustainable Energy.]
                                 ______
                                 
     Prepared Statement of the Carbon Utilization Research Council
    Summary of CURC Fiscal Year 2023 Recommendation: The Carbon 
Utilization Research Council (``CURC'') is an industry coalition 
focused on technology solutions for the responsible use of our fossil 
energy resources in a balanced, low carbon generation portfolio.\1\ 
CURC recommends $1,388,250,000 for the CCUS & Power Systems Program, 
funded by the Fossil Energy Research and Development (FE R&D) budget.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \1\ For more information, please visit www.curc.net.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    Benefits of Investment in Carbon Management Technologies: 
Deployment of carbon management technologies including carbon capture, 
utilization, and storage (CCUS) will have emissions reductions 
benefits, contribute to a growing economy, and play a critical role in 
the ongoing energy transition. In addition to providing low-carbon, 
dispatchable electricity to load follow intermittent renewables on the 
electric grid, CCUS provides a mean to reduce emissions from hard-to-
decarbonize industrial processes including cement production and 
steelmaking and can help to create low- and zero- carbon fuels 
including hydrogen that have a wide variety of applications to 
decarbonize transportation, hard-to-abate industries, and provide long 
term, seasonal storage for the grid. International climate authorities 
like the International Energy Agency have determined that reaching 
economywide net-zero emissions in any scenario is ``virtually 
impossible'' without CCUS.
    Federal investment in CCUS RD&D will also substantially benefit 
U.S. economic competitiveness, as the technology will allow us to 
maintain existing jobs and expertise in incumbent industries in 
addition to creating new, high-wage jobs in the energy and 
manufacturing sectors.
    CURC-EPRI Roadmap: CURC and the Electric Power Research Institute 
(EPRI) continuously evaluate technology needs that reflect changing 
markets and policies that impact fossil fuel use in the electric 
sector, which are communicated through an Advanced Technology Roadmap. 
The Roadmap identifies a suite of CCUS technologies that, if 
implemented, can deliver low carbon emission, fossil-fueled power 
plants between 2025-2035 that are cost-competitive with other sources 
of electricity. Several technologies identified in the Roadmap are 
readying for large-scale pilot testing while others are preparing for 
commercial demonstration. It is critical that a program is implemented 
to successfully commercialize these technologies to successfully meet 
any proposed net-zero objectives. This means annual Federal budgets 
must increase to support the scale-up effort.
    Federal Support of RD&D: The U.S. has been a leader in the 
development of fossil energy technology with the support of the DOE's 
world class CCUS RD&D programs. In 2020, Congress recognized the need 
for expedited development and deployment of these technologies through 
the enactment of Public Law 116-260, which authorized approximately 
$6.7 billion over 5 years for carbon management RD&D. These 
authorizations are in alignment with the recommendations of the CURC-
EPRI Roadmap and will allow DOE to continue to make substantial 
progress in the development and commercialization of CCUS technologies 
for applications across sectors, including electric power.
     ccus & power systems program fiscal year 2022 specific budget 
                            recommendations
    CURC recommends full funding of the authorization levels for Carbon 
Management activities included in Public Law 116-260. However, CURC has 
several overarching comments regarding fiscal year 2022 funding for the 
CCUS and Power Systems Program:
    1. Any additional funding provided by Committee for new program 
activities should not come at the expense of existing initiatives, for 
which the Department has already made substantial progress to 
commercialize technologies.
    2. Funding for selected projects under the Coal FIRST Initiative 
should be provided to construct project facilities, as each project is 
intended to demonstrate technologies that will result in net-zero 
carbon electricity and hydrogen production and are in line with the 
objectives of this Administration.
    3. Continued funding should be directed to the Department to 
retrofit existing coal- and natural gas-fired electric power 
facilities, which will be critical to achieve the Administration's 
electric sector decarbonization objectives.
    4. Substantial investment is needed to enable large-scale carbon 
storage, which underpins the entire value proposition of electric power 
and industrial sector carbon capture as well as negative emissions 
carbon capture technologies.
    Carbon Capture Commercialization: CURC recommends $500M. CURC 
recommends funding for the Department to initiate a Carbon Capture 
Commercialization Program consistent with commercial demonstration 
objectives authorized in PL 116-260 and recommends that expanded 
funding for the Department be used to fund commercial-scale 
applications of carbon capture technologies for coal, natural gas, and 
industrial applications.
    Carbon Capture: CURC recommends $205M. Consistent with the 
objectives of Public Law 116-260, CURC's recommendation includes 
funding to support research, development, large-scale pilot projects, 
and carbon capture test centers for a variety of transformational 
carbon capture technologies to improve the efficiency and lower the 
cost of carbon capture in both power and industrial sector 
applications. Funding for carbon capture should also be applied to new 
transformational technologies that are part of the DOE's Advanced 
Energy Systems program (addressed below), as intended by the carbon 
capture program authorization in the Energy Act of 2020, as those 
technologies inherently include carbon capture as part of the overall 
process. CURC supports efforts to evaluate industrial carbon capture 
and negative emissions technologies, but not at the expense of critical 
existing R&D for post- and pre-combustion capture technologies. CURC 
recommends full funding for the National Carbon Capture Center (NCCC), 
which is a critical path for testing and scaling up new technologies.
    Front-End Engineering and Design: CURC recommends $50M for a front-
end engineering and design (FEED) program on coal, natural gas, and 
industrial applications of carbon capture technologies, consistent with 
objectives authorized in Public Law 116-260, which will provide 
technical and economic data necessary to accelerate CCUS project 
deployment. Funds within this appropriation should also be utilized to 
conduct FEED studies of carbon dioxide storage complexes that may be 
part of the carbon capture projects selected for a DOE award.
    Carbon Storage: CURC recommends $200M. CURC supports the authorized 
funding levels for Carbon Storage activities included in Public Law 
116-260. CURC notes that direct air capture and other negative 
emissions technologies will also be dependent on a robust carbon 
storage industry and recommends a more robust program as follows:
  --Storage Infrastructure: CURC--$180M.
    --Regional Initiatives: CURC--$30M to diversify the Regional 
            Initiatives' efforts, which were spun out of the Regional 
            Carbon Sequestration Partnerships (RCSPs). The Regional 
            Initiatives develop the geologic framework and 
            infrastructure necessary to validate and deploy carbon 
            storage, including the assessment of locations for 
            CarbonSAFE or other commercial-scale carbon storage 
            projects.
    --CarbonSAFE: CURC--$150M to fully fund CarbonSAFE Phase III 
            projects selected in fiscal year 2020 through to Phase IV 
            and, with remaining funds, solicit proposals for additional 
            CarbonSAFE projects. CarbonSAFE Phase III effort will seek 
            permits, continue to integrate efforts with regional 
            sources of CO2, demonstrate technical viability 
            of storage sites and support development of the 
            qualification processes necessary for a site to begin to 
            commercially accept CO2.
  --CCUS Storage R&D: CURC--$20M. CURC recommends continued focus on 
        R&D at all TRL levels to address technical gaps to improve 
        reliability of CCUS storage, including continued 
        characterization of potential storage opportunities, monitoring 
        and modeling technologies, risk assessment and mitigation tools 
        should be supported.
    Carbon Utilization: CURC recommends $55.25M. CURC recommends 
funding for Carbon Utilization RD&D activities consistent with Public 
Law 116-260.
    Advanced Energy Systems: CURC recommends $273M. Public Law 116-260 
includes authorizing language for R&D and large-scale pilot projects 
for a variety of transformational carbon management technologies, 
including those covered by the Advanced Energy Systems program that 
inherently include carbon capture as part of their system process. CURC 
recommends funding for specific subprograms as follows:
  --Advanced Gasification Systems: $20M. CURC recommends continued 
        focus on research for low cost, modular gasification 
        technologies that will increase efficiency and lower capital 
        costs for coal and biomass to hydrogen or power applications, 
        as well as research to support a broad range of R&D.
  --Advanced Turbines: $50M. CURC recommends funding to undertake R&D 
        to improve the efficiency of gas turbines, to utilize 100 
        percent hydrogen as well as hydrogen-natural gas blends as well 
        as ammonia and ammonia-hydrogen blends, and to test and 
        validate components and their performance as an integrated 
        system.
  --Fuel Cells: $40M. CURC recommends funding for the development of 
        next generation fuel cell technologies to produce both power 
        and hydrogen from fossil fuels.
  --Advanced Combustion Systems: $68M. CURC recommends funding to 
        advance novel energy conversion technologies, including 
        chemical looping ($11M), pressurized oxycombustion ($29M), and 
        supercritical CO2 systems ($38M) for bench-scale 
        work as well as to advance promising technologies to pilot-
        scale testing.
    Supercritical CO2Technology (STEP): CURC recommends 
$20M. CURC recommends efforts, consistent with the original scope of 
work, to complete the necessary design and construction of the 10-MW 
pilot and to conduct the necessary testing for the facility. CURC also 
recommends funds for competitively awarded research and development 
activities, coordinated with the Offices of Nuclear Energy (NE) and 
Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy (EERE), to advance the use of 
supercritical power cycles.
    Transformational Coal Pilot Plant Program: CURC recommends $10M, 
consistent with fiscal year 2021 appropriations, to continue funding 
Phase III projects selected in fiscal year 2021.
    Cross Cutting R&D Program: CURC recommends $75M. CURC's 
recommendations for Cross Cutting R&D include:
  --Sensors and Controls: $8M to improve monitoring of systems and 
        apply solutions to mitigate stress on fossil systems that 
        increasingly operate under cycling load conditions.
  --Extreme Environmental Materials: $16M. CURC recommends $8M to 
        support high temperature and pressure component testing under 
        real operating conditions, a project underway between DOE and 
        industry; and $8M for the A-USC Materials Consortium.
  --Water Management R&D: $15M for thermoelectric applications of water 
        use and reuse, reduced water withdrawals, clean-up of water 
        discharge, and zero liquid discharge (ZLD) technologies.
  --Computational Science: $11M.
  --Advanced Energy Storage Initiative: $5M. CURC supports funding for 
        thermal, mechanical, and chemical storage systems that can be 
        integrated with fossil power systems.
  --University Training and Research: $4M to develop the next 
        generation workforce for the fossil energy generation industry 
        which is experiencing a very large generation gap.
    Other Initiatives Within Fossil Energy Research and Development: 
Outside of the CCUS and Power Systems Program, CURC provides the 
following recommendations within the broader FE R&D portfolio:
  --Natural Gas Utilization: $40M. CURC recommends the establishment of 
        a new research and development initiative within the Natural 
        Gas Technologies office to effectively utilize natural gas for 
        decarbonization solutions. Within those funds, CURC recommends 
        $40,000,000 for sustainable fuels and chemicals research and 
        development focused on conversion of natural gas, natural gas 
        liquids and other gas streams to low-carbon products, including 
        chemicals and fuels such as ammonia and low carbon hydrogen. 
        Comprehensive planning approaches for transitioning segments of 
        the economy to hydrogen and other low-carbon fuels should be a 
        part of the program, including analysis of the infrastructure 
        required to store and transport these fuels. CURC also supports 
        the establishment of a Center for Sustainable Fuels and 
        Chemicals at the National Energy Technology Lab and a funding 
        level of up to $15,000,000 for this initiative from within 
        available funds for sustainable fuels and chemicals research 
        and development.
  --Hydrogen RD&D: $86M. CURC encourages the FE to expand hydrogen 
        research, development and demonstration activities that support 
        fossil fuel-derived hydrogen production equipped with CCUS 
        technologies that results in significantly reduced carbon 
        dioxide intensity. CURC encourages the Committee to recognize 
        the importance of low- and zero-carbon hydrogen production for 
        a variety of end uses and to support continued collaboration 
        with the EERE, OE, and NE.

    [This statement was submitted by Shannon Angielski, Executive 
Director, Carbon Utilization Research Council.]
                                 ______
                                 
 Prepared Statement of the Central Arizona Water Conservation District
    On behalf of the Central Arizona Water Conservation District 
(CAWCD), I encourage you to include an allocation of $10.7 million for 
the U.S. Bureau of Reclamation's Salinity Control Basinwide Program for 
the Colorado River Basin in the Fiscal Year 2023 Energy and Water 
Development Appropriations bill. Continued funding for the Basinwide 
Program, which supports salinity control projects, will help protect 
the water quality of the Colorado River that is used by approximately 
40 million people for municipal and industrial purposes and used to 
irrigate approximately 4 million acres in the United States.
    CAWCD manages the Central Arizona Project, a multi-purpose water 
resource development and management project that delivers Colorado 
River water into central and southern Arizona. The largest supplier of 
renewable water in Arizona, CAP delivers up to 1.5 million acre- feet 
of Arizona's 2.8-million-acre-foot Colorado River entitlement each year 
to municipal and industrial users, agricultural irrigation districts, 
and Tribal communities.
    Our goal at CAP is to provide an affordable, reliable and 
sustainable supply of Colorado River water to a service area that 
includes more than 80 percent of Arizona's population. These renewable 
water supplies are critical to Arizona's economy and to the economies 
of Native American communities throughout the state. Nearly 90 percent 
of economic activity in the State of Arizona occurs within CAP's 
service area. The canal provides an economic benefit of $100 billion 
annually, accounting for one-third of the entire Arizona gross state 
product. CAP also helps the State of Arizona meet its water management 
and regulatory objectives of reducing groundwater use and ensuring 
availability of groundwater as a supplemental water supply during 
future droughts. Achieving and maintaining these water management 
objectives is critical to the long-term sustainability of a State as 
arid as Arizona.
  the colorado river basin salinity control program--its history and 
                              significance
    Recognizing the rapidly increasing salinity concentration in the 
Lower Colorado River and its impact on water users, Arizona joined with 
the other Colorado River Basin States in 1973 and organized the 
Colorado River Basin Salinity Control Forum (Forum). In 1974, in 
coordination with the U.S. Department of the Interior and the U.S. 
State Department, the Forum worked with Congress on the passage of the 
Colorado River Basin Salinity Control Act (Act) to offset increased 
damages caused by continued development and use of the waters of the 
Colorado River. Title I of the Salinity Control Act deals with the 
United States' commitment to the quality of water being delivered to 
Mexico. Title II of the act deals with improving the quality of the 
water delivered to the U.S. users.
    In the early years of the Program, Reclamation implemented salinity 
control through large projects that were funded with specific line-item 
amounts. In 1995, Congress amended the act and created Reclamation's 
Basinwide Program. Under this program, Reclamation funds competitive 
proposals that will decrease the salt load to the Colorado River. Most 
of the received proposals target off-farm irrigation distribution 
systems such as canals and laterals. The lining or piping of canals and 
laterals prevents leakage into the groundwater and the dissolution and 
transportation of salts to the Colorado River and its tributaries. 
States provide a 30 percent cost share of the projects implemented by 
Reclamation. CAWCD and other key water providers in the United States 
and Mexico are working to maintain salinity standards.
                 negative impacts of concentrated salts
    Natural and man-induced salt loading to the Colorado River creates 
environmental and economic damages. The Environmental Protection Agency 
(EPA) has identified that more than 60 percent of the salt load of the 
Colorado River comes from natural sources. With the significant Federal 
ownership in the Basin, most of this comes from federally administered 
lands. Human activity, principally irrigation, adds to the salt load of 
the Colorado River. Further, natural and human activities concentrate 
the dissolved salts in the River.
    In 2020 the Bureau of Reclamation (Reclamation) estimated the 
quantifiable damages to Lower Basin water users due to elevated 
salinity levels at about $354 million per year. Modeling by Reclamation 
indicates that quantifiable damages would increase to approximately 
$671 million annually by 2040 if the program were not to continue. 
Damages, by water usage sector, include the following:
  --A reduction in the ability to reclaim and reuse water for 
        beneficial uses, including drinking water and irrigation water 
        supplies, due to high salinities in the water delivered to 
        water treatment and reclamation facilities;
  --A reduction in the yield of salt sensitive crops and increased 
        water use to meet the leaching requirements in the agricultural 
        sector;
  --Increased use of imported water and cost of desalination and brine 
        disposal for recycling water in the municipal sector;
  --A reduction in the useful life of galvanized water pipe systems, 
        water heaters, faucets, garbage disposals, clothes washers, and 
        dishwashers, and increased use of bottled water and water 
        softeners in the household sector;
  --An increase in the cost of cooling operations and the cost of water 
        softening, and a decrease in equipment service life in the 
        commercial sector;
  --An increase in the use of water and the cost of water treatment, 
        and an increase in sewer fees in the industrial sector;
  --A decrease in the life of treatment facilities and pipelines in the 
        utility sector; and
  --Difficulty in meeting wastewater discharge requirements to comply 
        with National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit 
        terms and conditions, and an increase in desalination and brine 
        disposal costs due to accumulation of salts in groundwater 
        basins.
                               conclusion
    Implementation of salinity control practices through Reclamation's 
Basinwide Program has proven to be a very cost-effective method of 
controlling the salinity of the Colorado River. In fact, the salt load 
of the Colorado River has now been reduced by roughly 1.2 million tons 
annually. However, shortfalls in recent Basinwide Program funding 
levels have led to inefficiencies in the implementation of the overall 
Program. The funding amount requested is required to get the Basinwide 
Program back on pace with the overall Program implementation needs.
    The current drought that has significantly impacted the West 
affects the amount of and quality of available water, which in turn has 
the potential to exacerbate the salinity concentration levels. As such, 
we respectfully request $10.7 million for the U.S. Bureau of 
Reclamation's Basinwide Program for the Colorado River Basin in the 
Fiscal Year 2023 Appropriations bill.
    Continuation of adequate funding levels for salinity within this 
program will prevent further degradation of water quality of the 
Colorado River and significant increases of economic damages to its 
nearly 40 million municipal, industrial and irrigation users.

    [This statement was submitted by Theodore C. Cooke, General 
Manager, Central Arizona Water Conservation District.]
                                 ______
                                 
       Prepared Statement of the Clean Hydrogen Future Coalition
    Summary of CHFC Fiscal Year 2023 Recommendation: CHFC recommends 
$865,000,000 for clean hydrogen research, development, and deployment 
(RD&D) activities at the Department of Energy for fiscal year 2023. 
These recommendations would direct $745,000,000 to clean hydrogen 
programs within the Office of Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy 
(EERE) and $120,000,000 to clean hydrogen programs within the Office of 
Fossil Energy and Carbon Management. In order to effectively utilize 
these funds, the CHFC recommends that the Department continues its 
collaboration between the Offices of EERE, Fossil Energy and Carbon 
Management, Nuclear Energy, and Science.
    Background on the Clean Hydrogen Future Coalition: The Clean 
Hydrogen Future Coalition (CHFC) is a diverse group of stakeholders 
supporting Federal clean hydrogen policies that will stimulate the 
adoption of clean hydrogen in the U.S. and enable our country to 
achieve national decarbonization objectives while also increasing U.S. 
global competitiveness. CHFC members represent a broad spectrum of 
forward-thinking entities in industries that will play a critical role 
in the transition to a clean energy economy with a robust role for 
clean hydrogen.
    Importance of Investments in Clean Hydrogen RD&D: With its ability 
to be used as a fuel source for transportation, as an industrial or 
chemical feedstock, or to produce and store electricity, clean hydrogen 
will have a critical role in accelerating decarbonization across all 
sectors of our economy. For example, clean hydrogen will be necessary 
to decarbonize heavier modes of transport--including heavy-duty 
trucking, shipping, and aviation--that are substantially more 
difficult, if not impossible, to electrify than passenger vehicles. 
Clean hydrogen can also be used to power certain high-temperature 
industrial processes that cannot be electrified and for which other 
mitigation options are limited or unavailable. In the electric power 
sector, clean hydrogen can be used to produce CO2 emissions-
free electricity and can be used to enable the long-duration energy 
storage necessary to achieve the net-zero emission electric grid 
envisioned by the Biden administration.
    The CHFC was pleased to see the Department of Energy announce its 
Hydrogen Earthshot last year, which seeks to reduce the cost of clean 
hydrogen by 80 percent to $1 per 1 kilogram in 1 decade (``1 1 1''). 
This is a very ambitious goal and will require significant funding for 
public-private partnerships, as well as additional policy tools like a 
clean hydrogen production tax credit (PTC).
    The Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act (IIJA) provides 
significant investments that will promote the development of the U.S. 
hydrogen economy, including funding for regional hydrogen hubs that 
will drive capital investments in hydrogen production, transport, 
distribution, and end-use. The IIJA will also provide critical funding 
to drive down production costs for electrolytic hydrogen. These 
programs will be critical to advancing clean hydrogen in the U.S., but 
robust R&D funding from Congress is still needed to develop new, cost-
effective technologies to scale hydrogen infrastructure necessary to 
reach decarbonization objectives and to fully leverage the investments 
made by the IIJA.
 fy 2023 specific budget recommendations--office of energy efficiency 
                          and renewable energy
    The CHFC recommends $745 million for clean hydrogen RD&D activities 
within EERE. While EERE has traditionally housed the majority of 
Federal RD&D programs related to hydrogen, CHFC encourages the 
Committee to provide direction to DOE requiring cross-Department 
collaboration on hydrogen RD&D activities.
    Hydrogen and Fuel Cell Technologies: CHFC recommends $370 million. 
The CHFC provides the following direction for that funding:
  --Research, Development, and Demonstration: The CHFC recommends that 
        the Hydrogen and Fuel Cell Technology Program expands its clean 
        hydrogen RD&D activities based on the detailed priorities 
        included in the IIJA in coordination with the Offices of Fossil 
        and Nuclear Energy. The Department should continue research on 
        novel onboard hydrogen tank systems, trailer delivery systems 
        to reduce cost of delivered hydrogen, novel chemical hydrogen 
        carriers, and development of material-based storage and 
        hydrogen storage materials. Funding for electrolyzer 
        development, including high-temperature electrolyzer RD&D 
        activities should be funded with the $250 million appropriated 
        by the IIJA for these activities. The Department should be 
        directed to continue to advance fuel cell technology 
        development for the transportation fleet, including for long 
        haul and heavy-duty trucking, aviation, rail and maritime 
        applications.
  --Nuclear Demonstration: CHFC recommends that $18 million be provided 
        to cost-share the Office of Nuclear Energy hydrogen 
        demonstration project, including for high temperature 
        electrolysis research and development at a national laboratory.
  --H2@scale Front-End Engineering and Design: The CHFC recommends $120 
        million for a front-end engineering and design (FEED) program 
        intended to support the hydrogen hub funding made available in 
        the IIJA. Funding FEED studies will enable industry to more 
        rapidly access private sector capital to invest in projects. 
        The Department should conduct FEED studies on projects that 
        will produce clean hydrogen with low-, net-zero, or net-
        negative carbon dioxide emissions. Eligible hydrogen 
        technologies should include hydrogen production integrated with 
        wind or solar power generation, autothermal reforming, compact 
        hydrogen generators, biomass combustion to hydrogen, and solid 
        waste and plastics to hydrogen.
    Energy Efficiency & Renewable Energy, Industrial Decarbonization: 
Given the potential of hydrogen technologies to significantly 
decarbonize applications in the industrial sector, the CHFC recommends 
$50 million for an Industrial End Use RD&D program. The Department 
should utilize these funds for a research, development, and 
demonstration program focused on technologies that include fuel cells 
and direct use of hydrogen to replace fossil fuel use, including non-
road vehicle applications. The Department should include in its efforts 
the iron and steel, chemical manufacturing, and other industrial 
applications requiring high temperatures.
    SuperTruck III Program: CHFC recommends $300 million for continued 
funding of the SuperTruck III program to improve the energy and freight 
efficiency of heavy- and medium-duty long- and regional-haul vehicles. 
These funds should be used to invest in private sector efforts to build 
and manufacture new hydrogen fueled truck designs and associated 
fueling and other infrastructure needed to support the expansion of a 
hydrogen trucking industry.
    Building Technologies, Safety, Codes and Standards: CHFC recommends 
$25 million to address significant R&D gaps that are stalling the 
transition to lower-carbon and zero-carbon fuels in buildings. The CHFC 
encourages the Department to continue to explore research and 
development that can advance systems and appliances, driven by 
delivered fuels including renewable fuels and hydrogen, to meet 
consumer demand for safe, high efficiency and environmentally friendly 
products in residential and commercial building applications, increased 
utilization of renewable fuels and hydrogen, appliance venting, hybrid 
fuel-fired and electrically-driven systems, and on-site (micro) 
combined heat and power to include cooling and integration with 
renewables. The Department should also conduct a study and testing 
programs to examine the potential for integration of renewable fuels 
and hydrogen in building applications.
 fy 2023 specific budget recommendations--office of fossil energy and 
                           carbon management
    The CHFC recommends $120 million for the Office of Fossil Energy 
and Carbon Management to undertake hydrogen-related RD&D activities 
within the Fossil Energy Research and Development (FE R&D) Program. The 
FE R&D Program should continue to leverage existing expertise to 
further develop clean hydrogen production from fossil fuels coupled 
with carbon capture, utilization, and storage (CCUS) with low- and net-
zero CO2 emissions, or net-negative emissions when fossil 
fuels are co-fired with sustainable biomass resources. The Office of 
Fossil Energy and Carbon Management is also uniquely positioned to 
assess issues related to hydrogen transport and distribution
    Natural Gas Technologies: The CHFC recommends $50 million for the 
Natural Gas Technologies Program as follows:
  --Natural Gas Hydrogen RD&D: CHFC recommends $50 million for research 
        and development related to the conversion of natural gas into 
        low-carbon, sustainable products, including chemicals and 
        fuels, such as ammonia and hydrogen. As part of this program, 
        the Department should consider how these chemicals and fuels, 
        including hydrogen, can decarbonize industries. The Department 
        should also continue its efforts at the Center for Sustainable 
        Fuels and Chemicals at the National Energy Technology Lab.
    CCUS and Power Systems: CHFC recommends $70 million for hydrogen-
related RD&D activities within the CCUS and Power Systems Program as 
follows:
  --Advanced Turbines R&D: CHFC recommends that within available funds 
        for Advanced Energy Systems, $50 million be made available for 
        Advanced Turbines. The Department should use these funds for a 
        research and development program focused on utilizing clean 
        hydrogen, clean hydrogen-natural gas blends, and ammonia and 
        ammonia-hydrogen blends, to test and validate components and 
        their performance as an integrated system, working 
        cooperatively with industry, universities, and other 
        appropriate parties.
  --Solid Oxide Fuel Cells: CHFC recommends $20 million for the 
        development of next generation SOFC/SOEC technologies to 
        produce power and hydrogen from fossil fuels, biogas, and 
        hydrogen. Recognizing the significant progress made in system 
        integration and lifetime extension for SOFC's from this 
        program, this activity builds on research and development to 
        enable efficient, cost-effective electricity generation and 
        hydrogen production with minimal use of water. This program 
        will result in development of SOFC/SOEC technologies to produce 
        hydrogen and electricity while benefiting from the synergy in 
        the EERE hydrogen and fuel cell programs relative to 
        infrastructure developments and safety of end use. This funding 
        will preserve U.S. leadership in SOFC/SOEC technology, ensure 
        utilization of extensive fossil fuel resources in the U.S., and 
        will result in ultra-high efficiency production of power and 
        hydrogen.

    [This statement was submitted by Shannon Angielski, President, 
Clean Hydrogen Future Coalition.]
                                 ______
                                 
 Prepared Statement of the Colorado River Basin Salinity Control Forum
    Waters from the Colorado River are used by approximately 40 million 
people for municipal and industrial purposes and used to irrigate 
approximately 5.5 million acres in the United States. Natural and man-
induced salt loading to the Colorado River creates environmental and 
economic damages. In 2020 the Bureau of Reclamation (Reclamation) 
estimated the quantifiable damages to Lower Basin water users due to 
elevated salinity levels at about $354 million per year. Congress 
authorized the Colorado River Basin Salinity Control Program (Program) 
through the Colorado River Basin Salinity Control Act (Act) (Public Law 
93-320) in 1974 to offset increased damages caused by continued 
development and use of the waters of the Colorado River. Modeling by 
Reclamation indicates that the quantifiable damages will rise to 
approximately $671 million annually by the year 2040 without 
continuation of the Program. Congress has directed the Secretary of the 
Interior to implement a comprehensive program for minimizing salt 
contributions to the Colorado River. Reclamation serves as the lead 
Federal agency in implementing the Program. Reclamation primarily 
institutes salinity control through its Basinwide Program. A funding 
level of $10.7 million is required in 2023 to prevent further 
degradation of the quality of the Colorado River and a commensurate 
increase in downstream economic damages to water users.
    EPA has identified that more than 60 percent of the salt load of 
the Colorado River comes from natural sources. The majority of land 
within the Colorado River Basin is federally owned, much of which is 
administered by the Bureau of Land Management (BLM). In authorizing the 
Program, Congress recognized that most of the salts in the Colorado 
River originate from federally owned lands. Title I of the act deals 
with programs downstream of Imperial Dam that enable the U.S. to meet 
its commitment regarding the quality of waters being delivered to 
Mexico (Minute No. 242 of the International Boundary and Water 
Commission, United States and Mexico). Title II of the act addresses 
measures upstream from Imperial Dam, thus improving the quality of the 
water delivered to users in the United States. This testimony deals 
specifically with Title II efforts.
    In the early years of the Program, Reclamation implemented salinity 
control through large projects, which were funded with specific line-
item amounts. In 1995, Congress amended the act and created 
Reclamation's Basinwide Program. Under this program, Reclamation funds 
competitive proposals for projects which will decrease the salt load to 
the Colorado River. Most of the received proposals target off-farm 
irrigation distribution systems such as canals and laterals. The lining 
or piping of canals and laterals prevents leakage of water into the 
groundwater system and the dissolution and transportation of salts to 
the Colorado River and its tributaries. It is more efficient and cost 
effective for Reclamation to perform the off-farm distribution system 
improvements prior to NRCS treating the on-farm acres with salinity 
control practices (i.e., Reclamation should pipe a canal or lateral 
prior to the Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) putting a 
pressurized sprinkler system on farm). Shortfalls in recent Basinwide 
Program funding levels have led to inefficiencies in the implementation 
of the overall Program. The funding amount identified above is required 
to get the Basinwide Program back on pace with the overall Program 
implementation needs.
    Concentration of salt in the Colorado River causes approximately 
$354 million annually in quantified damages and significantly more in 
unquantified damages in the United States and results in poor water 
quality for United States users. Damages, by water usage sector, 
include the following:
  --a reduction in the ability to reclaim and reuse water for 
        beneficial uses, including drinking water and irrigation water 
        supplies, due to high salinities in the water delivered to 
        water treatment and reclamation facilities,
  --a reduction in the yield of salt sensitive crops, increased water 
        use to meet leaching requirements and additional actions 
        necessary to comply with the Clean Water Act within the 
        agricultural sector,
  --increased use of imported water and cost of desalination and brine 
        disposal for recycling water in the municipal sector,
  --a reduction in the useful life of galvanized water pipe systems, 
        water heaters, faucets, garbage disposals, clothes washers and 
        dishwashers, and increased use of bottled water and water 
        softeners in the household sector,
  --an increase in the cost of cooling operations and the cost of water 
        softening, and a decrease in equipment service life in the 
        commercial sector,
  --an increase in the use of water and the cost of water treatment, 
        and a corresponding increase in sewer fees in the industrial 
        sector,
  --a decrease in the lifespan of treatment facilities and pipelines in 
        the utility sector, and
  --difficulty in meeting wastewater discharge requirements to comply 
        with National Pollutant
    Discharge Elimination System permit terms and conditions, and an 
increase in desalination and brine disposal costs necessary to minimize 
accumulation of salts in groundwater basins.
    The Colorado River Basin Salinity Control Forum (Forum) is composed 
of gubernatorial appointees from Arizona, California, Colorado, Nevada, 
New Mexico, Utah, and Wyoming. The Forum is charged with reviewing the 
Colorado River's water quality standards for salinity every 3 years to 
facilitate compliance with Section 303(c) of the Clean Water Act 
(Public Law 92-500). In so doing, it adopts a Plan of Implementation 
consistent with these standards. The level of appropriation requested 
in this testimony is in keeping with the adopted Plan of 
Implementation. If adequate funds are not appropriated, significant 
damages from higher salinity concentrations in the water will be more 
widespread in the United States and Mexico.
    In summary, implementation of salinity control practices through 
Reclamation's Basinwide Program has proven to be a very cost-effective 
method of controlling the salinity of the Colorado River and is an 
essential component to the overall Program. Adequate funding levels for 
salinity control within this Program will prevent the water quality of 
the Colorado River from further degradation and significant increases 
in economic damages to municipal, industrial and irrigation users. A 
modest investment in source control pays huge dividends in improved 
water quality for nearly 40 million Americans.

    [This statement was submitted by Don A. Barnett, Executive 
Director, Colorado River Basin Salinity Control Forum.]
                                 ______
                                 
      Prepared Statement of the Colorado River Board of California
    This testimony is provided by the Colorado River Board of 
California (Board) and is in support of fiscal year 2023 funding for 
the Department of the Interior for Title II Colorado River Basin 
Salinity Control Act of 1974 (Public Law 93-320), as amended. In the 
act, Congress designated the Department of the Interior, Bureau of 
Reclamation (Reclamation) to be the lead agency for salinity control in 
the Colorado River Basin. Reclamation primarily implements salinity 
control through its Basinwide Program, established by Congress through 
an amendment to the act in 1995. Funding levels for the Basinwide 
Program have fallen behind in recent years, and a funding level of 
$10.7 million is requested to be provided in FY-2023 to prevent further 
degradation of the quality of Colorado River water supplies and 
increased economic damages. Under the Basinwide Program, Reclamation 
funds competitive proposals for projects which will decrease the salt 
load to the Colorado River. Most of the received proposals target off-
farm irrigation distribution systems such as canals and laterals. The 
lining or piping of canals and laterals prevents leakage of water into 
the groundwater system and the dissolution and transportation of salts 
to the Colorado River and its tributaries.
    The Colorado River System is used by approximately 40 million 
people for municipal and industrial purposes and used to irrigate 
approximately 5.5 million acres in the United States, and supplies 
municipal and agricultural uses in Mexico. Within Southern California, 
the Colorado River serves close to 20 million residents and 860,000 
acres of irrigated agriculture, including municipal, industrial, and 
agricultural water users in Imperial, Los Angeles, Orange, Riverside, 
San Bernardino, San Diego, and Ventura Counties. Natural and human-
induced salt loading to the Colorado River creates environmental and 
economic damages. In 2020 Reclamation estimated the quantifiable 
economic damages from salt in the Colorado River at about $354 million 
per year. Modeling by Reclamation indicates that these economic damages 
could rise to nearly $671 million annually by the year 2040 without 
continued implementation of the Basinwide Program.
    The Board is the state agency charged with protecting California's 
interests and rights in the water and power resources of the Colorado 
River system. In this capacity, California participates along with the 
other six Colorado River Basin States in the Colorado River Basin 
Salinity Control Forum (Forum), the interstate organization responsible 
for coordinating the Basin States' salinity control efforts. In close 
cooperation with the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and 
pursuant to requirements of the Clean Water Act, the Forum is charged 
with reviewing the Colorado River's water quality standards every 3 
years. Every 3 years the Forum also adopts a Plan of Implementation 
consistent with these water quality standards. The level of 
appropriation being supported by this testimony is consistent with the 
Forum's 2020 Plan of Implementation for continued salinity control 
efforts within the Colorado River Basin. The Forum's 2020 Plan of 
Implementation can be found on this website: https://
coloradoriversalinity.org/docs/2020 percent20REVIEWpercent20-
percent20Finalpercent20wpercent20appendices.pdf.
    If adequate funds are not appropriated to Reclamation's Basinwide 
Program, significant environmental and economic damages associated with 
increasing salinity concentrations in Colorado River water will become 
more widespread in the United States and Mexican portions of the 
Colorado River Basin. For example, damages occur from:
  --A reduction in the ability and increased costs to reclaim and reuse 
        water for consumptive beneficial use, including drinking water 
        supply and irrigation, due to high salinities in the water 
        delivered to water treatment and reclamation facilities;
  --A reduction in the yield of salt-sensitive crops, increased water 
        use to meet the leaching requirements to maintain crop 
        productivity, and additional actions necessary to comply with 
        the Clean Water Act in the agricultural sector;
  --Increased use of imported water and increased cost of desalination 
        and brine disposal for recycling water in the municipal sector;
  --A reduction in the useful life of galvanized water pipe systems, 
        water heaters, faucets, garbage disposals, clothes washers and 
        dishwashers, and increased use of bottled water and water 
        softeners in the residential sector;
  --An increase in the cost of cooling operations and the cost of water 
        softening, and a decrease in equipment service life in the 
        commercial sector;
  --An increase in the use of water and the cost of water treatment, 
        and a corresponding increase in sewer fees in the industrial 
        sector;
  --A decrease in the lifespan of treatment facilities and pipelines in 
        the utility sector; and
  --Difficulty in meeting wastewater discharge requirements to comply 
        with National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit 
        terms and conditions, and an increase in desalination and brine 
        disposal costs necessary to minimize accumulation of salts in 
        groundwater basins.
    The 2020 Plan of Implementation, as adopted by the Basin States and 
approved by EPA, calls for 62,400 tons annually of additional salinity 
control measures to be implemented by Reclamation, Natural Resources 
Conservation Service, and Bureau of Land Management by 2024. Over the 
past years, the Basinwide Program has proven to be a very cost-
effective approach to help mitigate the impacts of increased salinity 
in the Colorado River. Adequate Federal funding of this important 
program is essential. Based on current program cost levels, 
Reclamation's funding for the Basinwide Program must be at least $10.7 
million to meet those annual salinity control targets.
    The Colorado River is, and will continue to be, a major and vital 
water resource to the nearly 20 million residents of southern 
California, including municipal, industrial, and agricultural water 
users in Imperial, Los Angeles, Orange, Riverside, San Bernardino, San 
Diego, and Ventura Counties. The protection and improvement of Colorado 
River water quality through an effective salinity control program 
avoids additional economic and environmental damages to California, the 
other Colorado River Basin States and Mexico that rely on Colorado 
River water resources.
    Thank you for your consideration of this testimony.
                                 ______
                                 
  Prepared Statement of the Electric Drive Transportation Association
    The Electric Drive Transportation Association (EDTA) is the cross-
industry trade association promoting the advancement of electric drive 
technology and electrified transportation. We are writing to support 
robust fiscal year 2023 funding for the Department of Energy's (DOE) 
electric transportation programs, including the Vehicle Technologies 
Program, Hydrogen and Fuel Cell Technologies Office, ARPA-E, Department 
of Energy Loan Programs, Clean Cities, and programs established by the 
Bipartisan Infrastructure Law (BIL) to increase electric vehicle (EV) 
deployment across the country.
    EDTA's members represent the entire value chain of electric drive, 
including vehicle manufacturers, battery and component manufacturers, 
utilities and energy companies, smart grid and charging infrastructure 
developers. Collectively, we are committed to realizing the economic, 
national security and environmental benefits of displacing oil with 
electricity in hybrid, plug-in hybrid, battery, and fuel cell electric 
vehicles. DOE's research, development and deployment programs speed the 
innovation needed to transition to e-mobility.
    The importance of electrifying transportation has been widely 
documented. Emissions from the transportation sector threaten public 
health and the environment. A recent report published in Lancet 
Planetary Health documents that air pollution is responsible for nearly 
seven million premature deaths each year. Electric transportation is 
essential to reducing these harmful emissions. The Union of Concerned 
Scientists studied the total emissions reductions of electric drive in 
every region of the country. The study found that no matter where in 
the U.S. an EV is charged and operated, it has fewer total well-to-
wheels emissions than the average gasoline-powered vehicle sold today.
    Electrification is also a national security imperative. According 
to the U.S. Energy Information Administration, the transportation 
sector accounted for approximately 26 percent of the Nation's energy 
use in 2020; 90 percent of that energy came from petroleum fuels. This 
reliance is a chronic threat to U.S. energy and economic security. As 
we are being reminded today, oil reliance also keeps consumers and 
businesses vulnerable to volatile markets and spiking prices. The price 
of electricity is more stable and affordable than gasoline, with gas 
costing nearly three times as much per gallon compared to the eGallon 
price equivalent for electricity.
    In her testimony to the subcommittee on April 28, 2022, Secretary 
Granholm detailed the role of DOE's portfolio of electrification 
programs in realizing the environmental, economic and competitiveness 
benefits of e-mobility. Specifically, DOE's Vehicle Technologies 
Program is a critical element of the National effort to decarbonize 
transportation, leveraging private sector investments to promote 
innovation in advanced vehicles, infrastructure and manufacturing 
chains. The program advances research in batteries and power 
electronics, electric drive motors, components and charging 
technologies. Increased range, reduced costs, and improved performance 
are battery advances supported by the Battery and Electric Drive 
Technology subprogram. Critical supporting infrastructure, including 
charging systems and codes and standards for communication with the 
grid, are being developed in the Vehicle Systems Simulation & Testing 
program.
    The Vehicle Technologies Program is also advancing electric 
alternatives in commercial vehicles. The truck and transit segment is 
projected to grow rapidly in the next two decades. Research, 
demonstration, and deployment of electric drive technologies for 
combination tractors, heavy-duty pickup trucks and vans and vocational 
vehicle technologies' systems and components will speed technology 
breakthroughs and contribute to cost reductions while providing public 
health benefits and energy cost savings throughout the economy.
    The SuperTruck Program is an important part of this effort. We 
support increased program investment in Class 7 and Class 8 vehicles, 
which are a significant part of the commercial fleet. An expanded 
program should continue to engage partners from across the 
manufacturing chain--chassis original equipment manufacturers, 
intermediate and final stage manufacturers, including hybrid system 
suppliers, and infrastructure providers--to improve performance in 
vocational vehicles.
    Through the Hydrogen and Fuel Cell Technologies Office, DOE is 
working with industry to accelerate the availability of fuel cell 
electric vehicles. There are over 12,000 of these zero emission 
electric vehicles on American roads today. DOE's Hydrogen Shot seeks to 
reduce the cost of clean hydrogen by 80 percent to $1 per 1 kilogram in 
one decade, improving the affordability of the production, storage, and 
distribution of clean hydrogen to help achieve the goals of H2@Scale.
    Improvement of battery technology remains an industry priority to 
help achieve cost parity of EVs with ICE vehicles. Battery prices fell 
approximately 89 percent between 2010 and 2020, with a 13 percent drop 
in 2020 alone, according to BNEF. Prices are expected to continue to 
decrease--despite challenges associated with material sourcing--with 
the development of novel battery chemistries, more efficient 
manufacturing, and simplified pack designs.
    To address these material sourcing challenges, we support the 
Department's efforts to strengthen the domestic supply chain for 
critical elements in EV batteries, including lithium, nickel, and 
cobalt. The Department's recently announced $3 billion investment, 
directed under the BIL, will enhance domestic capacity to meet demand 
for these critical elements.
    ARPA-E's role is essential in overcoming high-risk technological 
barriers that the private sector may not attempt in the early stages of 
research and development. Past programs, such as Robust Affordable Next 
Generation Energy Storage Systems (RANGE) and Batteries for Electrical 
Energy Storage in Transportation (BEEST), helped improve performance 
and reduce costs of batteries. New programs would expedite innovation 
in critical materials and develop new processes to recycle, reuse, and 
reclaim battery materials.
    We ask that the subcommittee continue its record of support for 
these programs, particularly in vehicle and infrastructure deployment 
activities and in early market development, education, validation and 
enabling activities. We support increased collaboration among 
universities, the 17 National Laboratories, and industry to address 
these challenges and develop clean energy solutions. Continued funding 
of the Department's loan programs, including Title 17 and Advanced 
Technology Vehicles Manufacturing (ATVM), will build domestic capacity 
and support good-paying manufacturing jobs.
    EDTA also strongly supports the Clean Cities program. Clean Cities 
works with nearly 75 local and regional coalitions to expand deployment 
of electric drive and alternative fuel cars and trucks and recharging/
fueling infrastructure, especially in underserved and BIPOC 
communities. These voluntary and locally-driven efforts have a 
demonstrated record of success, including the cumulative displacement 
of more than 12 billion gasoline gallon equivalents (GGEs) of petroleum 
with alternative fuels since the program began in 1993.
    To advance the Administration's effort to install 500,000 charging 
stations across the country through the National EV Infrastructure 
(NEVI) Program, we support directing resources to help municipalities 
participate. These resources could be used to reduce the time and costs 
for permitting, inspecting, and interconnecting eligible infrastructure 
through standardized requirements, online application systems, 
recognition programs, and other technical assistance.
    We appreciate the Committee's long-standing support for the 
important research, development and deployment programs at the 
Department of Energy. At this inflection point for the climate change 
action and for the electric drive industry, we respectfully request 
that appropriations for fiscal year 2023 reflect the magnitude of both 
our National energy challenge and our electric drive opportunity.
    Thank you for your consideration.

    [This statement was submitted by Genevieve Cullen, President, 
Electric Drive Transportation Association.]
                                 ______
                                 
  Prepared Statement of Energy Efficiency Strategy Group Organizations
    We, the undersigned, write today to urge you to support robust 
energy efficiency (EE) investments in critical programs managed by the 
U.S. Department of Energy (DOE). Increasing investment in these 
programs can deliver significant emissions reductions, grow jobs in the 
clean energy sector, and provide savings to American consumers.
    Energy efficiency, a key domestic resource, is critical to ensuring 
safe, reliable, and affordable energy to Americans now and in the 
future. Efficiency measures have cut our energy use in half relative to 
the size of the U.S. economy since 1980. This energy waste reduction 
has effectively delivered more than $2,000 in annual savings per 
American. According to the American Council for an Energy-Efficient 
Economy, scaling up key energy efficiency-related policies and programs 
can slash U.S. energy use and greenhouse gas emissions by about 50 
percent by 2050. These energy savings would amount to more than $700 
billion in 2050.
    The U.S. energy efficiency workforce is comprised of over 2.1 
million Americans, which is the largest share of the entire U.S. energy 
sector and is more than all combined jobs in clean and fossil energy 
generation. Most of these jobs provide good compensation and cannot be 
shipped overseas, ensuring that future generations of Americans can 
pursue competitive careers in energy efficiency.
    The importance of the U.S. DOE in research, technical assistance, 
and market integration efforts that have driven gains in energy 
efficiency cannot be overstated. U.S. DOE EE programs provide 
exceptional value to American consumers and businesses, yielding 
benefits that far outweigh the relatively nominal outlays appropriated 
by Congress. According to various impact evaluation studies, DOE's 
innovation investments have had a benefit-to-cost ratio of 33 to 1 and 
generated billions of net economic benefits for the country.
    We respectfully request fiscal year 2023 regular appropriations 
funding for the following DOE programs, as summarized below:
    Buildings Technologies (BTO): $542 million to develop innovative, 
cost-effective technologies, tools, and solutions that help U.S. 
homeowners, consumers, and businesses achieve peak energy efficiency 
performance in their buildings across all sectors of our economy. 
Within this account, robust funding is needed for:
  --Residential Buildings Integration (RBI): $122 million for DOE to 
        collaborate with the residential building industry to improve 
        the energy efficiency of both new and existing homes. RBI 
        develops critical technologies, tools, and solutions that help 
        U.S. consumers and businesses achieve peak efficiency 
        performance in residential buildings across the country. RBI's 
        work supports workforce development and training and has 
        partnerships with thousands of small businesses in this sector, 
        the construction trades, equipment, smart grid technology and 
        systems suppliers, integrators, and State and local 
        governments. The integration research, demonstration, and 
        market transformation activities of RBI are critical as we 
        transform America's new and existing residential buildings and 
        work towards the Administration's goal of weatherizing 2 
        million homes.
  --Commercial Building Integration (CBI): $80 million for the 
        program's research, development, and evaluation help advance a 
        range of innovative building technologies and solutions, paving 
        the way for high performing buildings that could use between 50 
        percent and 70 percent less energy than typical buildings. CBI 
        works with industry, small businesses, academia, the National 
        labs, and other entities to advance energy efficiency solutions 
        and technologies for commercial buildings. The program, which 
        considers buildings as systems and as part of the electric 
        grid, continues to be transformative in moving industry 
        partners to embrace innovation.
  --Efficiency Standards, Building Codes, and Test Procedures: $90 
        million for equipment and building standards, including $60 
        million for appliance standards and $30 million for the 
        Building Energy Codes Program. DOE is responsible for setting 
        minimum energy efficiency standards for appliances, equipment, 
        and lighting to ensure new models continue to make progress on 
        efficiency as technology matures. The Department is far behind 
        in issuing new appliance standards, making an increased focus 
        critical. DOE plays an important support and technical 
        assistance role in the development and implementation of 
        building energy codes, which are adopted by States and local 
        governments for new construction and renovations of residential 
        and commercial buildings, that reflect developments in building 
        energy efficiency and ``lock in'' savings for the life of the 
        building. Education, training, and technical assistance have 
        been woefully underfunded over the past several years and can 
        be very impactful in assisting in codes' adoption and effective 
        implementation.
  --Emerging Technologies (ET): $160 million for the program to enable 
        cost-effective, energy-efficient technologies to be developed 
        and introduced into the marketplace. ET funds and directs 
        applied research and development (R&D) for technologies and 
        tools that support building energy efficiency, particularly 
        electric technologies for a carbon-free grid.
  --Grid-interactive Efficient Buildings (GEB): $50 million for DOE to 
        ensure that a high level of energy efficiency is a core element 
        of this new crosscutting program and a baseline characteristic 
        for GEBs which are also connected, smart, and flexible. The 
        Office should engage with the public and private sectors, 
        including the building and manufacturing industries and State 
        and local governments, to share information on GEB 
        technologies, costs, and benefits, and to provide information 
        to position American companies to lead in this area. Funding 
        for Connected Communities and other deployment activities is 
        encouraged.
    Advanced Manufacturing Office (AMO): $600 million to enable the 
research, development, demonstration, and deployment of industrial 
energy efficiency and advanced manufacturing technologies. This level 
of funding is intended to accommodate an ambitious agenda of 
decarbonizing U.S. manufacturing by the midcentury. This goal of 
dramatic reductions requires increases in activity levels across the 
Office and some important changes in the orientation of the Office's 
goals. AMO should expand its efforts from promoting energy efficiency 
to include efforts to reduce carbon emissions for manufacturing and 
reduce the embodied carbon in manufactured products. Additionally, as 
AMO rebuilds its staffing, the Office should focus on adding expertise 
in important decarbonization technology areas identified in its 
research road mapping.
  --Technical Assistance and Workforce Development:
    --Energy Management: $15 million for efforts to promote Strategic 
            Energy Management practices and $30 million for the 
            establishment of a program to provide competitive grants to 
            companies for the hiring or designation of plant energy 
            managers. For Strategic Energy Management, AMO should focus 
            efforts on small and medium-sized manufacturing plants.
    --Save Carbon Now: $55 million for the Better Plants program to 
            expand that program to offer comprehensive assessment and 
            engagements to the 1,500 largest greenhouse gas emitting 
            manufacturing facilities. These engagements should include, 
            but not be limited to, targeted assessments, staff 
            training, technical analyses of opportunities, and 
            education.
    --Existing Low-Carbon Technology: $60 million for the establishment 
            of a grant program for manufacturing plants to install 
            underutilized existing low-carbon technologies.
    --Smart Manufacturing: $30 million for support of the development 
            and adoption of smart manufacturing practices directed 
            towards small and medium-sized manufacturers. This 
            includes, but is not limited to, expanded funding for the 
            Clean Energy Smart Manufacturing Innovative Institute 
            (CESMII) to increase educational and technical assistance 
            activities directed toward smart manufacturing adoption.
  --Industrial Efficiency and Decarbonization: $55 million for 
        industrial process heating decarbonization through the 
        establishment of a research, development, and deployment effort 
        by AMO to promote the adoption of technologies that can 
        dramatically reduce the GHG emissions from process heating 
        applications.
    Office of Clean Energy Demonstrations (OCED): $200 million for 
transformative technology adoption through the establishment of a grant 
program that provides cost-share payments to manufacturing sites that 
make at-scale implementation of transformative technologies to reduce 
GHG emissions in intensive manufacturing processes.
    Manufacturing and Energy Supply Chains (MESC):
  --Industrial Assessment Centers: $30 million for the Industrial 
        Assessment Centers (IAC) program to expand the program in order 
        to increase the number of university-based centers to 40; to 
        establish satellite centers at community colleges, technical 
        schools, and union training facilities; and to establish an 
        apprenticeship program with matching funding for IAC students 
        at facilities that have received assessments in the recent past 
        to facilitate the implementation of recommendations.
  --Flex Tech: $40 million for the establishment of a Flex-Tech program 
        that provides grants to States and Tribal governments partnered 
        with educational institutions and trade associations to provide 
        energy and greenhouse gas reduction assessments and loans to 
        implement identified measures at small and medium-sized 
        manufacturers.
    Federal Energy Management Program (FEMP): At least $100 million to 
provide project and policy expertise to all Federal agencies, including 
not less than $60 million for the Department to continue its work 
through the Assisting Federal Facilities with Energy Conservation 
Technologies (AFFECT) program and $2 million for the Performance Based 
Contract National Resource Initiative. With minimal funding, FEMP 
supports all agencies of the Federal Government in their quest to save 
energy and money for the American taxpayer while improving agency 
infrastructure and addressing deferred maintenance. FEMP is at the 
forefront of efforts to improve Federal building energy performance, 
which is accomplished in part by accessing and leveraging private 
capital in performance contracts. FEMP's work has attracted private 
capital used to finance over 400 projects across two dozen agencies and 
resulted in $7.8 billion in investments in Federal energy efficiency 
and renewable energy improvements. These improvements have generated 
approximately $17.7 billion in cumulative energy cost savings for the 
Federal Government. Specified funding for AFFECT has been provided in 
prior fiscal years to provide small grants to Federal agencies to help 
achieve energy savings and resilience goals. These grants are then 
leveraged through performance contracts, allowing agencies to utilize 
private finance to complete innovative and comprehensive energy and 
water conservation projects that would not otherwise be possible.
    Weatherization Assistance Program (WAP): At least $422.5 million is 
recommended for the Weatherization Assistance Program, including $375 
million for the base Program, $10 million for training and technical 
assistance, and $37.5 million for the Weatherization Readiness Fund. 
R&D investments will continue to make emerging technologies cheaper and 
more accessible, but DOE's Weatherization Assistance Program is 
particularly important for bringing energy efficiency to communities 
and families that need it most. According to the Energy Information 
Administration, over 25 million American households report forgoing 
food or medicine to pay energy costs, while over 12 million households 
report being unable to use their heating or cooling equipment. Since 
1976, WAP has helped make more than 8 million homes more efficient, 
saving the average recipient about $4,200 over the lifetime of their 
home. Each WAP dollar produces $4.50 in benefits, including energy 
savings as well as improved health and safety. Federal weatherization 
assistance also helps workers and small businesses.
    State Energy Program (SEP): At least $115 million is recommended 
for State Energy Program grants, including $25 million to be used for 
technical assistance on energy and related air quality in schools. At 
least $90 million of the SEP funds shall be utilized for direct formula 
grants to the States. SEP leverages over $10 for every Federal dollar 
invested and saves over $7 for every Federal dollar invested. In 
addition to energy efficiency and renewable energy programs, SEP is 
critical for dealing with cyber security and energy emergency 
preparedness and response. SEP is extremely flexible and is the basis 
for a variety of partnership programs.
    U.S. Energy & Employment Report (USEER): $2 million for the Office 
of Policy to complete the annual U.S. energy employment report that 
includes a comprehensive statistical survey to collect data, publish 
the data and provide a summary report. The information collected will 
include data related to employment figures and demographics in the U.S. 
energy sector. The report presents a unique snapshot of energy 
efficiency employment in key sectors of the economy, including 
construction and manufacturing.
    Energy Information Administration: $144 million to continue 
important data collection, analysis, and reporting activities on energy 
use and consumption, including the Commercial Buildings Energy 
Consumption Survey and the Residential Buildings Energy Consumption 
Survey.
    We stand ready to work with Congress, the White House, and Federal 
agencies to identify ways the U.S. can improve the affordability and 
access of energy-efficient technologies, unlock utility savings for 
consumers, reduce energy-related carbon emissions, and improve public 
health. We appreciate your consideration of our requests.
    Sincerely,

    Advanced Energy Economy (AEE)
    Alliance to Save Energy
    American Council for an Energy-Efficient Economy (ACEEE)
    Building Performance Association (BPA)
    Business Council for Sustainable Energy (BCSE)
    E4TheFuture
    Environmental and Energy Study Institute (EESI)
    Federal Performance Contracting Coalition (FPCC)
    Institute for Market Transformation (IMT)
    International Code Council (ICC)
    National Association for State Community Services Programs (NASCSP)
    National Association of Energy Service Companies (NAESCO)
    National Association of State Energy Officials (NASEO)
    Natural Resources Defense Council (NRDC)
    Southeast Energy Efficiency Alliance (SEEA)
    U.S. Green Building Council (USGBC)

    [This statement was submitted by Dane Farrell, Energy Efficiency 
Strategy Group Organizations.]
                                 ______
                                 
  Prepared Statement of the Federal Performance Contracting Coalition
    Chair Feinstein, Ranking Member Kennedy, and members of the 
subcommittee, as you deliberate on the important programs to be funded 
in the FY23 appropriations bills, we respectfully request that $100 
million be allocated to the Federal Energy Management Program (FEMP) 
within the Office of the Under Secretary Infrastructure (formerly 
within the Office of Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy) at the 
U.S. Department of Energy (DOE), with $60 million designated to the 
Federal Energy Efficiency Fund, also known as Assisting Federal 
Facilities with Energy Conservation Technologies (AFFECT) grant 
program. We also request the following report language be included:

      ``The Committee recommends $100,000,000 for the Federal Energy 
        Management Program. The recommendation provides not less than 
        $60,000,000 for the Department to continue its work through the 
        Assisting Federal Facilities with Energy Conservation 
        Technologies (AFFECT) program. The Committee directs FEMP to 
        continue requiring all AFFECT grant funding to be leveraged 
        through private sector investment in Federal infrastructure to 
        ensure maximum overall investment in resiliency, efficiency, 
        emissions reductions, and security. Funding should be directed 
        to projects that attract at least 10 dollars for each Federal 
        dollar invested and that utilize public-private partnerships 
        like energy savings performance contracts (ESPCs) and utility 
        energy service contracts (UESCs).''
    In fiscal year 2022, Congress graciously directed $20 million for 
the AFFECT program. This small amount of funding allows agencies to 
continue to address resiliency as well as backlog maintenance, critical 
upgrade and maintenance needs, and other infrastructure on our Federal 
sites such as military bases, VA hospitals, and GSA buildings. The FPCC 
knows that we can address such critical infrastructure needs using 
fewer dedicated Federal dollars through performance contracting, and 
the AFFECT program facilitates just that.
    The FPCC believes that using just a nominal amount of appropriated 
dollars for critical priorities such as cybersecurity, resiliency, and 
net-zero/deep energy efficiency retrofits will net:
  --Additional private-sector dollars invested in the Federal 
        Government,
  --Improved Federal facility resiliency,
  --Significant energy cost savings,
  --Emissions reductions while addressing critical infrastructure 
        failures, and
  --Enhanced attention to ongoing operations and maintenance and 
        regular equipment replacement costs
    In fact, fewer dollars need to be appropriated overall if they are 
leveraged with private sector dollars. Leveraging allows precious 
Federal resources to focus on core mission objectives and transfers 
project execution risk to the private sector.
    FEMP is the appropriate place for these dollars as they will be 
available to leverage performance contracting for all Federal agencies. 
FEMP has provided small amounts of appropriated dollars to leverage 
performance contracting through the AFFECT grant program for the past 
several years. The $11 million appropriated in fiscal year 2021 
resulted in DOE investing a total of $13 million in AFFECT funding in 
17 Federal agency projects that, when combined with the investment from 
the private sector, are expected to surpass $737 million in 
infrastructure improvements. Congress further recognized the benefit of 
this program by providing it with $250 million in one-time funding 
through the bipartisan infrastructure law--and make no mistake: when 
considering the substantial amount of derelict and outdated 
infrastructure in Federal facilities, these dollars are needed more 
than ever to meet requirements to improve energy and water utilization 
and site resiliency. Performance contracting projects, which focus on 
new technologies and resiliency, will help agencies across the Federal 
Government address backlog maintenance, which the Office of Management 
and Budget (OMB) estimates is $174 billion government-wide. At a 
minimum, it would specifically address the $7.2 billion in cost-
effective energy-related backlog maintenance already identified in 
Congressionally mandated audits (EISA 2007, Section 432), which must 
now be addressed after the passage of the Energy Policy Act of 2020.
    FEMP, with minimal funding, supports all agencies of the Federal 
Government in their quest to become more efficient, resilient, and 
secure and to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. The FEMP function of 
assisting all Federal agencies allows them to achieve these goals while 
saving money for the American taxpayer, improving aging infrastructure, 
and addressing deferred maintenance. FEMP also plays the critical role 
of trainer, facilitator, and honest broker for all Federal facilities 
wishing to address necessary facilities- and energy-related 
infrastructure.
    As the single largest U.S. energy consumer with more than 360,000 
buildings and structures comprising 3 billion square feet, the Federal 
Government has a significant opportunity and responsibility to lead by 
example through demonstrating and deploying energy and water 
conservation best practices and technology solutions. FEMP is at the 
forefront of responding to Administration priorities, statutory 
requirements, and Federal agency needs while helping to maintain 
resilient, efficient, and secure installations for mission assurance. 
FEMP assists Federal agencies with various needs, including technology 
development and integration, infrastructure improvements, energy 
project development and implementation assistance, and workforce 
development.
    Energy Savings Performance Contracts (ESPCs) and Utility Energy 
Service Contracts (UESCs) are alternative financing methods created by 
Congress that utilize private sector resources and capabilities to 
complete Federal energy projects. Under an ESPC, a private company 
finances and implements an energy savings project for a Federal agency, 
measures and verifies that the installed measures are working as 
promised, and guarantees that energy savings will accrue. The private 
sector is then repaid over time through the savings on the customer's 
utility bill. As such, these contracts allow Federal agencies to 
address critical maintenance backlogs and infrastructure needs with no 
added expenditures by the Federal Government. According to FEMP, DOE 
IDIQ ESPC projects have achieved over $17.7 billion in guaranteed 
energy savings across the Federal Government and generated investments 
of $7.8 billion in Federal energy efficiency and renewable energy 
improvements. These projects have resulted in approximately 615 
trillion Btu in life cycle energy savings for the Federal Government, 
demonstrating their effectiveness as a tool to improve the Nation's 
energy independence and security posture.
    FEMP's role is essential. It provides training, guidance, and 
technical assistance to help agencies achieve their energy, water, and 
carbon reduction goals. Additionally, FEMP provides oversight of every 
ESPC for the life of the contract. Because agencies are short on 
personnel, this is a critical function to ensure dollars are well spent 
and maximize environmental impact.
    Utilizing performance contracting to address infrastructure 
improvements instead of using appropriated funds for direct services is 
a commonsense approach that reduces risk to the Federal Government and 
ensures that projects are well managed since the private sector partner 
must guarantee performance to get paid.
    In past years, when appropriated dollars have been scarce, FEMP 
funding has leveraged between $800 million and $1.4 billion in private 
investment in Federal infrastructure with no added cost to the Federal 
Government, using money from existing funding streams. A 2013 report by 
the Oak Ridge National Laboratory (ORNL) titled Beyond Guaranteed 
Savings: Additional Cost Savings Associated with ESPC Projects found 
that for a typical ESPC, the actual cost savings to the Federal 
Government is 174 percent to 197 percent of the guaranteed savings by 
the contractor.
    The members of the Federal Performance Contracting Coalition (ABM, 
AECOM, Ameresco, CEG Solutions, Constellation, Energy Systems Group, 
Honeywell, Johnson Controls Inc., NORESCO, Schneider Electric, Siemens, 
Southland Energy, and Trane) know firsthand how impactful ESPCs are in 
saving energy costs, taxpayer money, and creating jobs in every State 
in the country. Our members represent approximately 90 percent of the 
Energy Savings Performance Contracts (ESPCs) in Federal facilities. 
They are committed to working with Congress and the Administration to 
facilitate more, faster, bigger, and better ESPC projects. Thank you 
for your consideration of our request.

    [This statement was submitted by Dane Farrel, Director, Government 
Affairs.]
                                 ______
                                 
           Prepared Statement of the Gas Turbine Association
    The Gas Turbine Association* (GTA) appreciates the opportunity to 
provide the Senate Committee on Appropriations with our industry's 
statement concerning recommended FY23 funding levels for the Department 
of Energy (DOE) Fossil Energy and Carbon Management R&D Program.
    GTA is fully supportive of the decarbonization goals that require 
significant investment with a relevant technology roadmap. GTA 
understands the global urgency surrounding Energy Security, Energy 
Equity, and Environmental Sustainability. Our deeply held belief is 
centered on the long-term value and benefit that gas turbine technology 
has made and will continue to make in terms of contributing to a 
balanced and greener energy solution. Our technology, innovative 
history, and pathway forward are centered on optimizing output, 
improving thermal efficiency, and achieving environmental friendliness 
by reducing GHG emissions (with a goal of achieving a zero-carbon 
impact). We have worked successfully and have commercialized low 
emissions products since the 1970's. Our investment path has focused on 
meeting the need for low-cost energy production and ensuring the 
operating flexibility that is driven by today's changing market 
demand--gas turbines complement renewable energy systems to ensure grid 
stability and resiliency. Our fast start/stop capability is unmatched 
in the market. Gas turbines will contribute significantly to the 
decarbonization of the energy market.
    The GTA strongly believes that DOE R&D funding should be 
prioritized to improve the performance and carbon footprint of our 
Nation's installed base of power generation infrastructure. Programs 
that incorporate diversity, equity, and inclusion elements to promote 
the representation and participation of different groups in the R&D 
space are an essential investment in underserved communities.
    Representing the largest share of current electrical generation 
across the country, gas turbines provide critically important 
electrical generation capacity and dispatchability functions that are 
key to effective and efficient grid operations. These benefits include:
  --Firming capacity enabling broader adoption and interconnection of 
        renewable generation facilities,
  --Integrating carbon capture and storage solutions, including both 
        pre- and post-combustion carbon capture technologies,
  --Securing energy through reliance on domestic sources of supply to 
        meet our Nation's growing energy needs,
  --Meeting social justice energy goals through affordable access.
    With this country's focus on infrastructural improvements, 
accelerated electrification and US manufacturing, we are entering a 
period when the U.S. economy will depend more than ever on advanced gas 
turbine technologies. Gas turbines are used extensively throughout the 
U.S. for centralized and distributed electrical power generation, as 
well as industrial applications. Gas turbines can reduce local air 
pollution, increase energy resilience, lower utility costs and energy 
burdens, and create good-paying jobs. By advancing energy security and 
stability, gas turbines can provide increasing support for equality of 
opportunity and access to energy.
    In addition, investing in improved turbine efficiencies as part of 
a ``performance package'' paired with carbon-capture technologies can 
help to operationalize lowest-cost carbon capture solutions. These 
solutions would in turn provide important elements enabling 
environmental justice: delivering resilient, clean, affordable power 
with advanced decarbonized gas turbine technology. This decarbonization 
may include the existing installed fleet, a significant portion of 
which is located within communities identified by the EPA as bearing a 
disproportionate burden of environmental harms and adverse health 
outcomes.\1\ Additionally, reducing the cost of capture promotes 
adoption, preserving existing jobs and communities while creating new 
jobs to modernize these vital assets. The gas turbine community looks 
forward to developing world class technology to ensure US net-zero 
generation and lead the world in affordable clean power.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \1\ United States Environmental Protection Agency, ``Power Plants 
and Neighboring Communities'', US EPA Clean Air Markets, Retrieved 05/
20/2022, www.epa.gov/airmarkets/power-plants-and-neighboring-
communities#graphing.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    As the US National Academy of Sciences has highlighted in a recent 
report, Advanced Technologies for Gas Turbines: ``the gas turbine 
industry will continue to play a critically important role in the 
generation of electric power, aircraft propulsion, and the oil and gas 
industry for decades to come, both domestically and globally.'' The GTA 
therefore strongly believes that advancing gas turbine technology 
should be a priority for the DOE and our Nation in order to keep our 
economy strong, preserve jobs, and maintain this country's preeminent 
position as a global gas turbine technology provider.
    Based on input from the National Academies study and other industry 
stakeholders, the GTA believes that the core element of these programs 
should include the following:
      1. Improved Efficiency. Increase combined cycle efficiency to 
        more than 67 percent and simple cycle efficiency to more than 
        50 percent. This involves both improvements to existing 
        installed power generation facilities as well as development 
        and commercialization of technologies for new generation 
        systems. Each percentage point increase in efficiency of the 
        U.S. gas turbine power generation fleet results in emissions 
        reductions equivalent to taking 2 million cars off the road, 
        and provides an economic benefit of more than $7 billion to the 
        U.S. economy.\2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \2\ 10-yr projection with EIA fuel price projections and 1 
percentage point efficiency improvement.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
      2. Improvements in Fuel Flexibility, enabling gas turbines to 
        operate with high proportions of hydrogen (including pure H2) 
        and other renewable gas fuels. This will make it possible to 
        achieve low to no CO2 emissions within our existing 
        generation base and power production infrastructure. Gas 
        turbines also have a significant role to play in compression 
        and distribution of hydrogen, leveraging existing 
        infrastructure and supporting upgrading of our Nation's gas 
        distribution network.
      3. Compatibility with Renewable Energy Sources delivering 
        resilient, clean and smart grids. This will enhance efficiency 
        and operational flexibility by reducing turbine start up times 
        and improving the ability to accommodate flexible power demands 
        inherent in integrating intermittent power sources into the 
        grid while retaining grid stability and enhancing resilience.
      4. Cutting-edge Technologies--research and development in areas 
        including combustion; heat transfer; high temperature materials 
        including superalloys, coatings, and ceramics paired with 
        improved manufacturability;
      5. Technology Demonstration and Validation Capabilities--support 
        component testing, subscale testing, and full-scale testing in 
        existing fleets
    In recent years the Fossil Energy budget has provided $27 million/
year for gas turbine technology R&D. This was increased to $35 million 
in FY 2022, however this level is still only a fraction of the funding 
authorized for this program by Congress in 2020. In the FY 2021 omnibus 
appropriations bill, the Energy Policy Act of 2020 established a 
dedicated line item for advanced gas turbine research and development. 
To build upon this development, the GTA urges the Senate to increase 
gas turbine R&D funding for the Fossil Energy Research and Development 
(FER&D): High Efficiency Turbines program to $50 million to match the 
level authorized in the Energy Act of 2020.
    With natural gas being key to our energy future, the DOE should 
invest in gas turbine research as part of a broad portfolio to 
accelerate decarbonization of our economy and robust U.S. manufacturing 
and job growth. GTA supports enhanced investment in research and 
development to minority institutions and HBCUs with programs advancing 
technology in clean energy, energy efficiency and climate programs 
geared to underserved communities.
    Gas turbines produce less than half the CO2 per megawatt hour than 
other fossil fuels, and have the ability to integrate hydrogen and 
other fuels to achieve low or zero-carbon emissions
  --Gas turbines are key to stabilizing the electrical grid.
  --Gas turbines, with their rapid response capability, are essential 
        for integrating with intermittent renewable energy sources to 
        provide reliable power at all times.
  --Gas turbines are a vital part of the growing distributed generation 
        infrastructure.
  --Gas turbines are a major manufacturing export sector for the United 
        States--the U.S. exports more than $10 billion annually in gas 
        turbine systems and components, and has a trade surplus of $6 
        billion per year in turbine technologies.
    Gas turbines provide a variety of functions essential to the 
effective, efficient and sustainable operation of America's energy 
system and our Nation's economy. In addition to the attributes outlined 
above, gas turbines are the primary source of dispatchable power for 
microgrids across the country (including hospitals, schools, military 
installations and the US Capitol complex), and underpin critical 
infrastructure including our Nation's natural gas distribution network. 
In addition, gas turbines ensure the stability and reliability of our 
Nation's electric grid while supporting hundreds of thousands of high-
paying jobs in US manufacturing, engineering, operations, repair and 
related occupations.
    The Department of Energy's R&D programs play a very important role 
in supporting the ongoing competitiveness of American manufacturers in 
the energy industry. Today's most advanced gas turbines have combined 
cycle efficiency levels exceeding 61 percent. In both the United States 
and other countries, there is a focus on technology advancements 
towards 65 percent, and long-term 67 percent+. In particular, China has 
identified advanced gas turbines as an industrial sector with critical 
strategic and economic implications and is devoting vast resources to 
building its gas turbine manufacturing industry as part of the ``Made 
in China 2025'' initiative. Maintaining the competitive edge for the 
U.S. gas turbine industry is critical to sustaining our manufacturing 
base and its jobs, producing electricity more efficiently, improving 
air quality, and increasing exports. An enhanced DOE focus on gas 
turbine technology R&D funding would lead to improved private/public 
strategic partnerships which are critical to R&D success and rapid 
market deployment. Examples of technology advancement areas include the 
development and integrated testing of: fuel-flexible combustors; 
turbine components; advanced cooling concepts; advanced aerodynamics; 
improved materials; and more capable coatings.
    In short, advancing gas turbine technology is important to the 
United States. And increased DOE funding in this strategic area can 
maximize the potential of every R&D dollar.
    The GTA respectfully requests $50 million in FY23 appropriations 
for the Fossil Energy R&D: High Efficiency Turbines Program targeted to 
advanced gas turbine R&D to meet critical national goals including 
decarbonization and environmental justice, fuel efficiency to lower the 
cost of electricity, high-tech jobs, grid stability and reliability, 
and fuel flexibility, as well as ensuring the US maintains its 
preeminent position in the global market.

    [This statement was submitted by Salvatore A. DellaVilla, Managing 
Director, Gas Turbine Association.]
                                 ______
                                 
                 Prepared Statement of Lincoln Network
    Chairwoman Dianne Feinstein, Ranking Member John Kennedy, and 
Members of the subcommittee:
    My name is Lars Erik Schonander. I am a Policy Technologist at 
Lincoln Network, a think tank to help bridge the gap between Silicon 
Valley and DC along with leveraging technology and technical talent to 
solve governance and policy challenges.
    The Department of Energy has requested $144 million for FY 2023 for 
the Energy Information Administration (EIA).\1\ As Congress considers 
that request, the committee should require the EIA to collect and 
report data on foreign investments in the U.S. energy sector to restore 
transparency in our energy industry as a requirement for fulfilling the 
request. I respectfully urge the committee to consider making EIA 
collect data on foreign energy investment in the United States again.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \1\ Department of Energy, ``Department of Energy FY 2023 
Congressional Budget Request,'', March 2022, https://www.energy.gov/
sites/default/files/2022-04/doe-fy2023-budget-in-brief-v6.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    Much like in the 1970s, when the United States founded the 
Department of Energy, we are in a chaotic period for the energy sector. 
With gas prices at new heights,\2\ it is critical that the public has a 
transparent picture of America's energy industry, and who controls and 
invests in the assets in said industry.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \2\ Ella Koeze and Clifford Krauss, ``Why Gas Prices Are So High,'' 
New York Times, June 14, 2022, https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/
2022/06/14/business/gas-prices.html.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    When Congress established the Department of Energy by passing the 
Department of Energy Organization Act of 1977, lawmakers included the 
following language to ensure transparency about foreign influence in 
the US energy sector and other matters: \3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \3\ General Accounting Office, GAO/NSIAD-90-25BR, Foreign 
Investment: Federal Data Collection on Foreign Investment in the United 
States (1989), p. 12, https://www.gao.gov/assets/nsiad-90-25br.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    In accordance with the Department of Energy Organization Act, 42 
U.S.C. 7257(8), the Energy Information Administration (EIA) prepares an 
annual report for the Secretary of Energy and for transmittal to 
Congress that summarizes foreign investment, energy operations, and 
financial performance in U.S. energy enterprises. The information is 
available for use by the Congress, government agencies, and the public.
    These reports provided legibility to our energy industry. For 
example, the ``Acquisitions and Divestitures in U.S. Energy by Foreign 
Direct Investors 2007'' report shows what companies and what countries 
bought and sold American energy companies.\4\ Similarly, the ``Profiles 
of Foreign Direct Investment in U.S. Energy'' report shows what regions 
of the world were investing in our petroleum industry.\5\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \4\ Energy Information Administration, ``Acquisitions and 
Divestitures in U.S. Energy by Foreign Direct Investors 2007,'' 2007, 
https://www.eia.gov/finance/archive/fdiad2007.pdf.
    \5\ Energy Information Administration, ``Profiles of Foreign Direct 
Investment in U.S. Energy,'' 1990, https://play.google.com/books/
reader?id=Hayc48sTggYC&pg=GBS.PA8&hl=en.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    Reviewing the history of this program, however, shows that the 
Department of Energy has stopped collecting this information.\6\ As a 
result of a $15.2 million budget cut at EIA in 2011, a variety of data 
collection programs were canceled.\7\ One of these programs was the 
form EIA-28, the ``Financial Reporting System.'' The EIA-28 form was 
the basis for the annual EIA reports providing analysis on foreign 
investment in our energy industry. Since its cancellation, no reports 
have been generated.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \6\ Lars Erik Schonander, ``The United States Should Collect Data 
on Foreign Energy Investment Again,'' RealClearEnergy, May 24, 2022, 
https://www.realclearenergy.org/articles/2022/05/24/
the_united_States_should_collect_data_on_foreign_energy_investment_again
_ 834001.html, May 24, 2022.
    \7\ Energy Information Administration, ``Immediate Reductions in 
EIA's Energy Data and Analysis Programs Necessitated by FY 2011 Funding 
Cut,'' April 28, 2011, https://www.eia.gov/pressroom/releases/
press362.php.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    The Committee should direct the Department of Energy to report to 
Congress on how to restart this program and collect this information. 
While EIA tried to restart the collection of the data after 2011, as 
seen by notices in the Federal Register in 2013,\8\ these submissions 
did not lead to the form being used again. Congress should require the 
Department of Energy to investigate why this program was cut in 2011 
and why attempts to bring it back later did not succeed, and then 
mandate the Department of Energy to bring back the program.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \8\ 78 Fed. Reg. No. 48 (March 12, 2013), https://www.govinfo.gov/
content/pkg/FR-2013-03-12/pdf/2013-05632.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
                               conclusion
    The funds that Congress provides to the Energy Information 
Administration offer the American people one of the best sources of 
information on our energy industry. In FY 2023, the Committee should 
mandate that funding to the EIA be tied to collecting data that 
provides transparency on how foreign investors interact with our energy 
industry. Doing so would allow the American people and Congress to 
understand the full extent of foreign countries' investment in our 
energy industry.

    [This statement was submitted by Lars Erik Schonander, Policy 
Technologist, 
Lincoln Network.]
                                 ______
                                 
                  Prepared Statement of Methane Action
    Mr. Chairman and Members of the subcommittee,
    In this testimony, on behalf of Methane Action, a not for profit 
organization, I summarize our detailed recommendations \1\ for removing 
methane and other major greenhouse gases from the atmosphere and 
beginning the governance of these methods. These recommendations are 
from scientists, lawyers, economists and engineers with expertise in 
the rapidly evolving science and policy of methane removal.\2\ The 
world must rapidly reduce emissions, of potent short-lived climate 
pollutants (SLCPs) \3\ such as methane, which is over 80 times more 
powerful than CO2 in its impact period of 20 years. Methane 
is now at twice its preindustrial levels in the atmosphere and rising 
every year, and a burst of methane could erupt at any time from the 
melting permafrost and shallow waters off Siberia. Therefore, we must 
develop and deploy methods of converting or removing methane and other 
``SLCPs'' responsibly and soon.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \1\ We have provided, e.g., a memo to your staff under the title 
``Catalog of Research Needs''.
    \2\ (See, E.g., scientists' letter of April 2021 at 
MethaneAction.org).
    \3\ Mitigating climate disruption in time: A self-consistent 
approach for avoiding both near-term and long-term global warming. 
Dreyfus, G. B., Xu, Y., Shindell, D. T., Zaelke, D., & Ramanathan, V. 
(2022). Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 119(22), 
e2123536119. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2123536119.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    We recommend that you include in your FY23 bill the language below 
to create a Climate Restoration Program and that your Committee Report 
include descriptions of the removal methods below to guide the EPA, 
though the agency could adjust the details.
    Suggested Bill Language: After adding $22,200,000 to the ARPA-E 
section total, insert: ``Of the funds included under this heading, no 
less than $22,200,000 shall be allocated for the establishment of a 
Climate Restoration Program led by the Secretaries of Energy and 
Agriculture, the Bureau of Reclamation and the Administrator of the 
Environmental Protection Agency, for the research, development, 
assessment and deployment of methods for the long term removal, 
oxidation or destruction of methane and other greenhouse gases, near 
and far from their sources, whether related to energy or not, using, 
among other methods: filters, oxidation, photocatalysis, metal 
catalysts, biological action, enhanced rock weathering, and 
agricultural innovations including regenerative agriculture to improve 
soil health and carbon drawdown, as further described in the report 
accompanying this act.''
    Suggested Committee Report Language: Several of the following 
Climate Restoration research programs could cover more than 1 year with 
contracts or grants committed or obligated in FY23. These examples are 
illustrative and not meant to be definitive or exhaustive. All are 
expected to be cost-effective. For comparing the cost of removing 
methane and other climate-forcing gases, the term ``CO2 
equivalent'' (CO2-eq) refers to removing an amount of the 
gas that has global warming potential equivalent to an equal amount of 
CO2. The Committee expects reports on the benefits, co-
benefits and costs.\4\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \4\ We note that most scientists calculate that methane is at least 
80 times more powerful in its warming than CO2 over 20 years 
and this makes its removal far more important than the 100 year 
equivalent estimates used in older accounting. See, Abernethy S, 
O'Connor FM, Jones CD, Jackson RB. 2021 Methane removal and the 
proportional reductions in surface temperature and ozone. Phil. Trans. 
R. Soc. A 379: 20210104--''Our results demonstrate the effectiveness of 
methane removal in delaying warming thresholds and reducing peak 
temperatures, and also allow for direct comparisons between the impacts 
of methane and carbon dioxide removal that could guide future research 
and climate policy.''
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Explanation of the Research Proposed
    1. Zeolite surfaces. Zeolites are porous, high surface area 
alumina-silicate minerals used as molecular sieves and in water-
treatment applications. Copper (Cu)--and iron (Fe)-zeolites are 
methane-oxidizing catalysts already used to convert methane to methanol 
(CH3OH), a partial oxidation product (one added oxygen atom). More 
recently, zeolites have been shown to oxidize methane to carbon 
dioxide.\5\ The ability of zeolites to adsorb CO2 from the 
atmosphere is well known. Scientists have screened almost 100,000 
zeolite structures as potential methane sorbents. Relatively low-
temperature methane oxidation has already been shown in zeolites such 
as Cu-ZSM-5 and Fe-ZSM-5, with Fe zeolites able to oxidize methane at 
room temperature. Higher temperatures and pressures generally lead to 
greater conversion efficiencies. Teams leading: Stanford University, 
U.S.; Massachusetts Institute of Technology (M.I.T.), U.S. (partially 
funded to date by ARPA-E) Cost range: Target of $100 per metric ton of 
CO2 equivalent. For active systems with blowers, air 
handling will be required (hence the desire to partner with operating 
DAC facilities). Passive systems do not require such air handling. 
Funding need: $500,000/yr, 2 years ($1,000,000 total) for sorbent and 
catalyst development at ambient methane concentration.    $1,000,000
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \5\ Methane removal and atmospheric restoration. Jackson, R. B., 
Solomon, E. I., Canadell, J. G., Cargnello, M., & Field, C. B. (2019). 
Nature Sustainability, 2(6), 436-438. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41893-
019-0299-x; Atmospheric- and Low-Level Methane Abatement via an Earth-
Abundant Catalyst. Rebecca J. Brenneis, Eric P. Johnson, Wenbo Shi, and 
Desiree L. Plata, 29 December 2021, ACS Environment Au. https://
doi.org/10.1021/acsenvironau.1c00034.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    2. Photocatalytic surfaces (small scale urban solar chimneys)--
prototype testing. Photocatalysts are metal oxide minerals activated by 
sunlight or by artificial UV-light able to oxidize organic pollutants 
and greenhouse gases, at room temperature.\6\ The smaller the size of 
the nanoparticles and the larger the surface area and porosity, the 
faster the oxidation rate. Several are proven to fully oxidize methane, 
such as modified zinc oxide or titanium dioxide. Trials will be 
conducted on the ventilation system of an agricultural facility with 
cows. Then a prototype will be tested on a landfill. Cost range: Based 
on estimations of infrastructure requested results in a cost ton-\1\ 
CO2-eq is $166 by 2030 with a target of $100 by 2040. 
Funding need: $1,500,000 per year for 3 years + additional $1,000,000 
to build the pilot plant.    $5,500,000
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \6\ The comprehensive performance analysis on a novel high-
performance air-purification-sterilization type PV-Trombe wall. Yu, B., 
Li, N., Yan, C., et al. (2022). Renewable Energy, 182, 1201-1218. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.renene.2021.11.029; A new double-skin facade 
system integrated with TiO2 plates for decomposing BTEX. Building and 
Environment, 180, 107037. Li, H., Zhong, K., & Zhai, Z. J. (2020). 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.buildenv.2020.107037.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    3. Photocatalytic large-scale solar chimneys and solar chimney 
power plants. Giant solar chimneys can be constructed that cause heated 
air to updraft, which provides flowing air that can generate 
electricity through a turbine, comparable to a windmill.\7\ The 
structure and coatings on the solar chimney allow flowing air to be 
cleansed of methane via photocatalytic coatings or other methods. Cost 
range: Based on estimations of infrastructure requested results in a 
cost per ton CO2-eq is $166 by 2030 with a target of $100 by 
2040. Funding need: $1,000,000 per year for 3 years:    $3,000,000
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \7\ Removal of non-CO2 greenhouse gases by large-scale atmospheric 
solar photocatalysis. De Richter, R., Ming, T., Davies, P., Liu, W., & 
Caillol, S. (2017). Progress in Energy and Combustion Science, 60, 68-
96. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pecs.2017.01.001; Ming, Tingzhen, et al. 
``Solar chimney power plant integrated with a photocatalytic reactor to 
remove atmospheric methane: A numerical analysis.'' Solar Energy 226 
(2021): 101-111. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solener.2021.08.024.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    4. Iron salt aerosols demonstration phase. Many ships burn low-cost 
bunker fuels that contain metals including iron that may have the 
favorable side effect of enhancing the naturally occurring chlorine 
atom sink for methane.\8\ Existing evidence supports the theory that 
the mix of particle-phase iron, sunshine, and sea spray (containing 
natural chloride) generates chlorine atoms that will oxidize methane in 
the ship's plume. University researchers are prepared to demonstrate 
this mechanism using a combination of laboratory experiment, reaction 
system modeling and field tests. After appropriate assessment, 
consultation, permitting and governance, practitioners could then 
harness its power to control methane at scale. It is important to note 
that this approach would take advantage of present-day shipping traffic 
and the large volumes of air that are in contact with dilute ship 
plumes. Cost-range: $9 per metric ton of CO2-eq or less. A 
full environmental impact assessment should be completed before 
deployment.    $1,500,000
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \8\ A nature-based negative emissions technology able to remove 
atmospheric methane and other greenhouse gases. Ming, T., de Richter, 
R., Oeste, F. D., Tulip, R., & Caillol, S. (2021). Atmospheric 
Pollution Research, 12(5), 101035. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.apr.2021.02.017; Wittmer, J., & Zetzsch, C. (2017). Photochemical 
activation of chlorine by iron-oxide aerosol. Journal of Atmospheric 
Chemistry, 74(2), 187-204. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10874-016-9336-6.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    5. Chlorine based photochemical removal at point sources. (Type 1) 
This method generates chlorine atoms using low-cost light sources and 
uses a catalytic mechanism to recycle chlorine within a closed reactor. 
The innovators are at technology readiness level 3 (experimental proof 
of concept) and seek to bring this to technology readiness 5 
(validation in relevant environment). Cost-range: Modeling based on 
power requirement results in a price of $9 per ton of CO2-
eq. Funding needed: $2 million to build a prototype to field to test at 
livestock barns and a coal mine
vent.    $2,000,000
    6. Chlorine-based photochemical removal in the global atmosphere. 
(Type 2) This method generates chlorine atoms using sunlight by 
generating an aerosol of FeCl3 in marine environment where 
there are sea brines. The reaction is catalytic in iron, the chlorine 
atoms being provided by the sea salt. The innovators are at technology 
readiness level 4 (prototype for the aerosol generation tested in-
doors) and seek to bring this to technology readiness level 5 
(validation in relevant environment). Cost-range: Modeling based on 
FeCl3 consumption results in a price of $2-3 per ton of 
CO2-eq.    $2,000,000
    7. Chlorine-based photochemical removal. (Type 3--Alternative 
Methods) The generation of Cl atoms can be made by photolysis of 
Cl2 gas, produced by the well-established chlor-alkali 
industrial process. Other methods to generate chlorine atoms to remove 
methane will be explored. In particular, in order to be able to rapidly 
react if a methane burst occurs (for instance from methane hydrates, 
due to a submarine landslide after an earthquake). Cost-range: $20 per 
ton of CO2-eq, based on estimations of chlorine gas prices 
and the cost of UV light at 254 nm for photolysis. Funding needed:    
$300,000
    8. Climate chemistry global model to study accelerated recovery of 
the stratospheric ozone layer. Enhancing the tropospheric production of 
hydroxyl radicals and chlorine atoms will increase oxidative capacity 
of the troposphere and might reduce the amount of halogenated compounds 
reaching the stratosphere. Before conducting open-air field tests, 
global computer modeling is needed to anticipate benefits and any 
possible side effects of halogenated gases from natural sources, such 
as chloromethane produced by plankton, and anthropogenic sources. This 
can be done using the climate-chemistry global model LMDz-INCA. Funding 
needed: $100,000 per year for 3 years:    $300,000
    9. Accelerate the recovery of the stratospheric ozone layer. Study 
the use of high altitude solar photovoltaic platforms, which receive 5 
times more solar energy than land-based PV panels, to generate UVB and 
UVC light to enhance the photolysis of N2O and CFCs, the 
oxidation of methane and the production of oxygen atoms and ozone below 
the lower stratosphere.\9\ Laboratory research and R&D are needed to 
optimize the aerostatic platform and the UV lamps materials (quartz or 
other materials transparent for low wavelength UV). Funding needed: 
$300,000 per year for 3 years:    $900,000
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \9\ Solar power generation using high altitude platforms 
feasibility and viability. Aglietti, G. S., Markvart, T., Tatnall, A. 
R., & Walker, S. J. (2008). Progress in Photovoltaics: Research and 
Applications, 16(4), 349-359. https://doi.org/10.1002/pip.815.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    10. Generation of hydroxyl radicals to increase methane removal by 
oxidation. Hydroxyl radicals are the predominant naturally occurring 
agents that naturally oxidize methane in the atmosphere. Commercially 
available hydroxyl generators based on UVB or UVC light exist, but for 
large scale use the energy consumption is high. Other methods for 
large-scale generation of hydroxyl radicals will be explored. Cost-
range: Based on estimations of infrastructure requested results in 
initial cost-range estimation of $200-1000 per ton of CO2-
eq. Funding need: $400,000 per year for 3 years:    $1,200,000
    11. Surface-based Photocatalytic Enhanced Methane Oxidation 
(SPEMO). The Department of Energy, in cooperation with EPA, and the 
Secretaries of Interior, Agriculture and State could contract for 3 
years of research and development of SPEMO to assess alternative 
methods to:
      (I)   lower methane emissions from coal mines, oil wells and 
        animal farms, and
      (II) apply photocatalytic paint to buildings, rooftops, 
        photovoltaic panels, or in a ventilated conduit to reduce 
        methane in the general atmosphere as a complement to commercial 
        photocatalytic paints and coatings already being used because 
        of their self-cleaning property and ability to reduce urban 
        pollution such as nitrogen oxides and volatile organic 
        compounds.    $3,000,000
    12. Methane mitigation via wetlands management. Wetlands emit 31 
percent of total methane emitted. The Bureau of Reclamation, in 
consultation with the Army Corps of Engineers, should conduct an 
investigation of relative wetland emissions of methane, through field 
surveys and laboratory experiments, to determine how alternative 
management practices could reduce greenhouse gas emissions and restore 
natural ecosystems.    $1,500,000

    [This statement was submitted by John Fitzgerald, Methane Action--
MethaneAction.org.]
                                 ______
                                 
              Prepared Statement of the Mni Wiconi Project
1. Fiscal Year 2023 OMR Request
    The Mni Wiconi Project respectfully requests $ 33.7 million in 
appropriations for operation, maintenance and replacement (OMR) 
activities in fiscal year 2023, including $2.082 million for the Bureau 
of Reclamation (BOR). The OMR request includes roughly $ 6.184 million 
for necessary crossing, pump station, and SCADA improvements. 
Additionally, the OSRWSS Core needs $38 million for South Core Line 
(Phase V) Replacement (see Section 2). Report language is also 
requested.
    OMR funds will be used as summarized in Table 1 by the Oglala Sioux 
Rural Water Supply System (OSRWSS), Rosebud Sioux Rural Water System 
(RSRWS), and Lower Brule Sioux Rural Water System (LBSRWS).

                                                 Table 1-Updated
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                             OSRWSS
                                  ---------------------------    RSRWS        LBSRWS    Reclamation     TOTAL
                                     Coreline   Distribution
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Number of Employees..............           17            33           14           13            8           85
Labor and Fringe Benefits........   $1,488,956    $2,115,004     $847,269     $990,600   $1,025,100   $6,466,929
Labor Overhead Costs.............      680,304       856,577      587,371      201,400      425,000    2,750,652
 
Non-Labor Costs
    Electricity/Natural Gas/           650,000       775,836      230,000      139,800      350,000    2,145,636
     Propane.....................
    Telephone/Communications.....       40,000        52,014       23,500       34,900  ...........      150,414
    Water Treatment Chemicals/         500,000       243,132       30,000      105,500  ...........      878,632
     Supplies....................
    Wells, Pumps, Motors &             400,000        88,511       62,000      104,500  ...........      655,011
     Replacement.................
    Water Testing................      140,000        32,782       10,000  ...........  ...........      182,782
    Vehicle OMR..................       83,000       299,407       85,200       97,400       17,000      582,007
    Water Service Providers......  ...........  ............      310,500  ...........  ...........      310,500
    Travel-Training..............       60,000        92,882        6,840       33,800       15,000      208,522
    Other........................      337,000        95,066      200,391      215,600      250,000    1,098,057
    Emergency Leak Repairs.......      500,000  ............  ...........  ...........  ...........      500,000
 
Extraordinary Replacements
    Meter vault, fuel tank &       ...........  ............  ...........      200,000  ...........      200,000
     security upgrades...........
    GPS/GIS......................  ...........       100,000  ...........       27,500  ...........      127,500
    PLC Upgrades (44)............  ...........     1,000,000  ...........  ...........  ...........    1,000,000
    West Brule Elevated Tank       ...........  ............  ...........    1,900,000  ...........    1,900,000
     Replacement.................
    Replace Standby Generator (3)  ...........  ............  ...........      700,000  ...........      700,000
    Increase Pipe Size: 8" to 12   ...........     2,500,000  ...........  ...........  ...........    2,500,000
     (Sharps to Rockyford--15 mi)
    Replace Sharps East            ...........     2,000,000  ...........  ...........  ...........    2,000,000
     Reservoir: 1 MG.............
    White River PS Replacement...  ...........  ............    2,500,000  ...........  ...........    2,500,000
 
Existing Community Transfer
    Wounded Knee OM&R............  ...........        25,000  ...........  ...........  ...........       25,000
 
Priority Community System
 Upgrades
    Production Well Replacements.  ...........       600,000  ...........  ...........  ...........      600,000
 
Projects
    White River Bore Crossing....    5,310,000  ............  ...........  ...........  ...........    5,310,000
    SCADA Redundancy Telemetry          65,000  ............  ...........  ...........  ...........       65,000
     Improvements................
    High Service Pump Station VFD      808,800  ............  ...........  ...........  ...........      808,800
                                  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------
TOTAL............................  $11,063,060   $10,876,211   $4,893,071   $4,751,000   $2,082,100  $33,665,442
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

    The OSRWSS Core System is the heart of the Mni Wiconi Project and 
serves the three Indian Reservations and the West River/Lyman-Jones 
Rural Water System (WRLJ) in 7 off-reservation counties covering 
southwestern South Dakota with a design capacity of 52,000 people. The 
Project now serves 41,250. Public Law 100-516, as amended, our 
authorizing legislation, found that:

       . . . the United States has a trust responsibility to ensure 
        that adequate and safe water supplies are available to meet the 
        economic, environmental, water supply, and public health needs 
        of the Pine Ridge Indian Reservation, Rosebud Indian 
        Reservation and Lower Brule Indian Reservation . . . 

    The request as presented in Table 1 will meet the purposes of the 
Act. Appropriation by Congress of adequate funds will fulfill the 
fiduciary responsibilities of the United States as articulated in the 
Act.
    The Project has been treating and delivering more water each year 
from the OSRWSS Water Treatment Plant near Fort Pierre. The population 
will continue to grow within the service area and will reach the design 
population late in the next decade. The OMR budget must be adequate to 
(1) keep pace with the system and its growing population and (2) 
protect and preserve the $470 million investment held by the United 
States in trust for the Tribes and by WRLJ. Funds are needed to 
properly operate and maintain the infrastructure.
    We appreciate the President's focus on improving critical water 
infrastructure in his requested $20.021 million for the Mni Wiconi 
Project. However, more is needed. We remind you of the Project's 
overall needs, including OMR for community systems when they are 
transferred into the Project, along with the actual costs of the 
upgrade work. We also remind you that the oversight budget decreases 
funds for routine maintenance and extraordinary replacements as 
referenced in Section 7.
2. Crossing and Phase V Project/Existing Community Transfers/
        Extraordinary Replacements
    Included in Table 1 is roughly $6.184 million for a crossing, pump 
station replacement, and SCADA improvements. The Coreline needs $ $5.31 
million to replace the White River Coreline crossing because there is a 
leak in the steel pipe under the river that is growing in size. This 
crossing is essential for the Pine Ridge Reservation and surrounding 
area south of the White River crossing. It also needs $808,800 million 
for the High Service Pump Station VFD Project and $65,000 for SCADA 
improvements.
    Not included in Table 1 for the OMR request, but a critical need 
for the OSRWSS Core is the South Core Replacement (Phase V) Project, 
which will move the lines around the City of Ft. Pierre to address 
recurrent leaks in the area. Project costs are estimated at $38 
million.
    Annual budgeting by the Administration must reflect: (1) increases 
in water deliveries as project population was added between 2013 and 
2015 with no corresponding increase in funding; (2) aging facilities in 
need of maintenance and replacement (since start of construction in 
1994 and through end of construction in fiscal year 2015); and (3) 40 
existing communities that must be transferred to the respective Indian 
rural water systems. It is critical that Project features not fall into 
disrepair and that sufficient funds are available for the OMR of 
existing community systems that are scheduled for inclusion in the 
Project in fiscal year 2023 (or were transferred earlier). Funding is 
also needed for the actual upgrade work, costs for which total in the 
tens of millions for the Indian Project Sponsors. We also ask the 
Subcommittee to be mindful of what BOR calls ``extra-ordinary 
replacements,'' which are actually necessary and routine when pumps, 
water treatment equipment, pipelines, and other facilities fail and 
require replacement to continue operations.
    The Mni Wiconi Project should be a shiny, new project that stands 
out as a beacon of modern technology. It provides under-privileged 
communities with safe and adequate drinking water of the highest 
quality and to improve the health and well-being of a low-income 
population, purposes that have been frustrated by inadequate attention 
to infrastructure maintenance.
    It is important to remember that for OMR activities, the Indian 
projects are left with the appropriated figure minus the approximate $2 
million that BOR takes for oversight. The reduced amount does not 
account for the needed storage towers, crossing replacement, the 
community upgrade work, any additional community system transfers, or 
unexpected extraordinary replacements.
    The Promise Zone designation for the Pine Ridge Indian Reservation 
was announced in April 2015. It focused on developing solutions to 
infrastructure challenges and the necessary resources to upgrade 
existing community systems, among other things, to revitalize the 
region. The request in Table 1 is consistent with the Promise Zone 
designation (and last Administration's Opportunity Zone designation), 
and underscores the need for OMR funding for routine maintenance, 
``extra-ordinary'' replacements and existing community systems 
following transfer.
    The need is the same on the Rosebud and Lower Brule Indian 
Reservations. Adequate funding for all activities, including community 
water systems that are transferred, is a necessity for the three Indian 
rural water systems in the Mni Wiconi Project. The following report 
language is requested (see previous Congresses for similarity):

      Mni Wiconi Project, South Dakota.--Reclamation is directed to 
        continue working with the Tribes and relevant Federal agencies, 
        such as the Department of Agriculture, the Environmental 
        Protection Agency, the Bureau of Indian Affairs, the Indian 
        Health Service, and the Department of Housing and Urban 
        Development to coordinate use of all existing authorities and 
        funding sources to finish needed community system upgrades and 
        connections, as well as any transfers of those systems, as 
        quickly as possible. The Administration is encouraged to 
        include appropriate funding for transferred community systems 
        in future budget requests. (House Report 114-532, Fiscal Year 
        2017)

    BOR's annual budget requests properly included the transfer of 
existing community systems and responsibility for operation and 
maintenance. The budget needs to reflect those transfers:

       . . . The project consists of new systems to be constructed, as 
        well as 40 existing Mni Wiconi community systems. 
        Responsibilities of the Secretary under the Act include the 
        operation and maintenance of existing water systems and 
        appurtenant facilities on the Pine Ridge, Rosebud, and Lower 
        Brule Indian Reservations. (Fiscal Year 2012-18 Budget 
        Justifications, p. GPR-49)

    BOR and other Federal agencies are now assisting the Tribes with a 
pathway for funding transfers and future OMR activities for the 40 
existing community systems as they become part of the Project and 
eligible for funding. It is crucial that these efforts continue. OMR 
funding is needed for communities that were upgraded and will be 
transferred (or have been transferred) to the Project.
3. OSRWSS Regional Core Facilities
    The staff of the OSRWSS core system includes 17 employees. The 
staff operates and maintains the 14 million gallon per day regional 
water treatment plant, 203 miles of main transmission pipeline from 12 
inches to 27 inches in diameter, nine major pumping stations (4 
Megawatt total capacity), nine reservoirs (4.2 million gallons of 
capacity) and supervisory control and data acquisition (SCADA) system, 
necessary to deliver safe and adequate drinking water to the service 
areas of OSRWSS, RSRWS, LRSRWS and WRLJ. Again, the Core Facilities 
need a crossing replacement, pump station project and SCADA 
improvements at a cost of roughly $6.184 million and total funding at 
$11,063,060.00. The OSRWSS Core also needs $38 million for the South 
Core Line Replacement (Phase V) Project.
4. OSRWSS Distribution on Pine Ridge Indian Reservation
    The OSRWSS Distribution's 33 employees are responsible for 
maintaining 760 miles of PVC water mains and service lines, 30 high 
production water wells, 33 booster pumps and treatment stations, 38 
water storage reservoirs, and 2,206 metered residences. The water 
system has been designed and constructed over a 24-year period, and 
services a total population of 21,510 residents on the Pine Ridge 
reservation. The construction of the water system is now complete and 
valued in excess of $150 million, although 20 additional community 
system upgrades and transfers are still pending. To operate and 
maintain our water system has become a challenge. The core system east 
of Kyle has 4 reservoirs which have a total of 520,000 gallons of 
storage, this equates to only enough for less than 6 hours of storage 
in emergency situations. Table 1 shows a proposed 1-million-gallon 
reservoir to be constructed adjacent to the Sharps East Reservoir that 
would increase the emergency storage to 18 hours. Table 1 also proposes 
increasing the existing 8'' waterline to a 12'' line over the 15 mile 
stretch from Sharps to the Rockyford Hwy 27/Hwy 2 Intersection Our 
older system will also require an estimated $1 million to replace all 
the obsolete programmable logic controllers (PLC) in our (44) pump and 
control stations located throughout the Reservation.
5. Rosebud Sioux Rural Water System (RSRWS)
    The staff of RSRWS or Sicangu Mni Wiconi has 14 full-time 
employees. The staff operates and maintains 425 miles of mainline, 15 
major pumping stations, 20 water storage reservoirs, 9 supply wells 
with two associated chlorination facilities, and SCADA system. A new 
production well was funded by Indian Health Service for 2023 for RSRWS 
to increase ground water production and water supply. The proposal was 
previously denied by BOR. A current RAX project is proposed to replace 
a critical asset known as White River PS. Asset management indicated 
replacement is needed at this site. The RSRWS budget also includes 
water service contracts with the City of Mission, Tripp County Water 
Users District (TCWUD) and others in the secondary service area now 
including the City of White River at a total cost of $310,500. The 
newly approved cooperative agreement negotiated in 2022 allows payments 
to the City of White River tribal residents in the amount of $60,000. 
No new monies were appropriated for this expense so the budget was 
reprogrammed to cover the additional costs. Likewise, in 1995 the 
citizens of Mission voted to transfer their municipal system to the Mni 
Wiconi Project and in 2003 a final agreement between the Tribe, the 
City of Mission, and BOR was consummated and the former municipal 
system is now held in trust for the Tribe as part of the RSRWS. The 
inclusion and OMR of the Mission system are authorized by Section 3A 
(a) (8) of the Mni Wiconi Project Act, as amended. The recent completed 
community upgrades in Antelope, Butte Creek, Okreek, and Parmelee 
communities are in the process of being transferred into the RSRWSS to 
be held in trust. Upcoming Upper Swift Bear and Spring Creek community 
water system upgrades will be completed by the end of fiscal year 2022. 
RSRWS is proposing a budget request of $4,893,071.00 for fiscal year 
2023 including the RAX request for the White River PS replacement.
6. Lower Brule Rural Water System (LBRWS)
    The LBRWS consists of a water treatment plant, six booster 
stations, three tanks/reservoirs, approximately 75 miles of core 
pipeline and approximately 300 miles of distribution pipeline. LBRWS 
has a staff of 12 full-time and two part-time employees to provide the 
operation and maintenance of these facilities. As shown in Table 1, 
wages and fringe benefits total $990,600.
    The budget continues to include $200,000 to upgrade main line meter 
vaults and $27,500 to obtain the GPS location of water lines installed 
by ranchers and to add the lines to the current GIS database. The meter 
pit upgrades will improve access to the meter vaults and prolong the 
life of the equipment within the meter pits, while the GPS/GIS 
information will provide needed information for the operation and 
maintenance as well as the management of the system.
    The Kennebec Booster Station (KBS) was originally designed based on 
the OST pipeline to Vivian being a 14-inch pipe. However, a significant 
portion of this line is only a 12-inch pipe. The consequence of this 
smaller pipe is significantly reduced inlet pressure at the pumps in 
the KBS. This has led to cavitation occurring in the pumps which has 
led to numerous pump replacements and complete booster station 
shutdowns, at times. To solve this issue, LBRWS has begun pumping less 
water with the KBS and supplying additional water with the LBRWS Water 
Treatment Plant (WTP). This method of solving the problem is working 
well, but to fully meet water needs and design standards the size of 
the West Brule elevated tank needs to be increased. In addition, 
standby generators for the WTP and booster stations #1 and #2 should be 
upgraded/replaced. As a result, the budget includes $1,900,000 to 
replace the existing West Brule tank with a larger tank and $700,000 to 
upgrade/replace generators for the WTP and booster stations. LBRWS will 
continue to work with the BOR and the other sponsors to prioritize 
their needs and ensure that their system is operating to the standards 
that have been established over the past several years.
7. Bureau of Reclamation (BOR)
    The BOR's budget is for oversight of operation and maintenance 
activities for all tribal systems, including the employment of an 
equivalent 8.0 persons. BOR pays the Western Area Power Administration 
for Project preference power used by the OSRWSS core system and Rosebud 
core system. BOR also pays for cathodic protection services for OSRWSS 
core system, Rosebud, and OSRWSS on-reservation DWM&C systems. BOR 
costs are expended before funds reach the Project.

    [This statement was submitted by Ron Blacksmith, Core System 
Manager, Oglala Sioux Rural Water Supply System; Chuck Jacobs, 
Distribution System Director, 
Oglala Sioux RWSS; Young Colombe, Manager, Rosebud Sioux Rural Water 
System; and Jim McCauley, Manager, Lower Brule Sioux Rural Water 
System.]
                                 ______
                                 
    Prepared Statement of the National Association of State Energy 
                               Officials
    Chair Feinstein, Ranking Member Kennedy, and members of the 
subcommittee, I am David Terry, Executive Director of the National 
Association of State Energy Officials (NASEO) testifying on behalf of 
our 56 governor-designated state and territory members. NASEO 
respectfully requests funding for the following U.S. Department of 
Energy (DOE) programs: $90 million for the U.S. State Energy Program 
(SEP) as formula funding to States with no more than 5 percent of the 
appropriated amount for use by DOE in providing technical assistance 
and support; $375 million for the Weatherization Assistance Program 
(with robust funding for the innovation and resilience funds); $392 
million for the Building Technologies Office, with $20 million for 
building energy codes, and $50 million for grid-interactive efficient 
buildings; $602 million for the Vehicle Technologies Office; $535 
million for SETO; $202 million for CESER, with robust support for ISER 
and program direction; A robust increase for the Office of Electricity 
including $81 million for energy storage and $50 million for regional 
electricity market development; $478 for carbon management within FECM; 
$100 million for FEMP; and $90 million for the Grid Deployment Office. 
The DOE $4 billion request for EERE is justified given the 
extraordinary energy affordability, climate, and reliability crises the 
Nation is facing.
    A bipartisan ``Dear Colleague'' letter led by Mr. Reed and Ms. 
Collins supporting funding for SEP and Weatherization was received and 
signed by 47 Members. The SEP statute provides States with flexibility 
to advance energy affordability and security, resilience, renewables, 
efficiency, EVs, grid planning and more in ways that link with state 
policy to achieve greater national impact. States work collaboratively 
using SEP formula funds to accelerate results: REVWest EV charging 
initiative (e.g., AZ, ID, NV, UT, WY); Microgrid Working Group (e.g., 
KY, IL, PA, TN, WA); Southeast EV initiative (e.g., KY, TN, AL); the 
Western Petroleum Response Collaborative which responds to supply 
disruptions caused by natural disasters (e.g., AK, WA, CA, OR); 
coordination on carbon utilization and hydrogen (e.g., LA, ND, WY, MT, 
AZ, CO); and building-grid electric management (e.g., CA, GA, WA, MS, 
IL, OR, TN, SC). Past Administrations have taken a portion of the SEP 
formula funds provided by Congress for competitive awards on DOE-
directed priority topics. NASEO strongly opposes this approach which 
limits States' ability to address their unique priorities. We urge 
Congress to explicitly provide the requested $90 million as formula 
funding to States with no more than 5 percent of the appropriated 
amount for use by DOE in providing technical assistance and support.
    SEP formula funds enable States to leverage DOE's research 
activities and work with the private sector to improve electricity 
resilience, accelerate clean energy development, catalyze investments 
in carbon capture, advance low-carbon hydrogen markets, support 
manufacturing energy efficiency, lower home energy costs through energy 
efficiency, and accelerate energy technology innovation through State-
private sector partnerships. Two Oak Ridge National Laboratory (ORNL) 
studies found that $1 of SEP formula funds leverages $10.71 of State 
and private funds and realizes $7.22 in energy cost savings for 
citizens and businesses. With SEP funds, the State Energy Offices lead 
or co-lead energy emergency planning and response across electricity, 
natural gas, and petroleum products in coordination with DOE's CESER-
which provides expertise to the States and energy industry. SEP formula 
funds are the key connection between billions of dollars spent by DOE 
on R&D and the priorities of States. State energy policy guides energy 
markets and a constructive DOE-state relationship can achieve greater 
impact. A greater reliance by DOE on the States and their local 
businesses and communities to ensure Federal R&D meets real world 
conditions would maximize the impact of R&D.
    Below are examples of States' utilization of SEP formula funds:
    California-Development of Appliance Standards. California uses SEP 
funds for appliance efficiency standards. In 2020 California's general 
services lamps standard became national, and in 2021 the state 
established standards for desktop/notebook computers, gaming systems, 
and pool pumps. Examples of previous standard successes: portable air 
conditioners saving 369 gigawatt-hours annually, and sprinklers saving 
150 billion gallons of water annually.
    Louisiana-Government and Industry Partners Set the Stage for CCUS 
and Hydrogen. Louisiana uses SEP funds to lead two major components of 
the State's strategy to combat climate change and develop its economy: 
achieve primacy in CO2 sequestration and coordinate the LA-AR-OK 
initiative to establish a hub for the production and use of clean 
hydrogen. The State Energy Office facilitated the announcement of two 
operating agreements for ``blue'' hydrogen/CCUS projects in 2021, 
positioning the state as a global leader in carbon management.
    Alabama-Energy Efficiency for Local Governments. Alabama used a 
portion of their SEP funds to support energy efficiency upgrades at 
wastewater treatment plants and local facilities. In all, 29 grants to 
local governments, universities, and non-profits increased energy 
efficiency and reduce costs by deploying variable frequency drives, 
lighting, and efficient HVAC systems. In addition, Alabama's Energy 
Security Plan is supported with SEP funds allowing for needed updates 
to adapt to changes in Alabama's energy portfolio and infrastructure.
    Alaska-Grants for Electric Vehicle (EV) Charging Stations. Alaska 
leveraged SEP funds to award $1 million in grants to support Level-2 
and DC fast-charging EV charging station deployment. The nine 
communities awarded grants are in critical locations along the State's 
highway system and will provide matching funds to complete the process. 
The program will develop new industries, help promote the economy, and 
save Alaskans money.
    Delaware-Energy Efficiency Fund. The Delaware Energy Office 
operates a highly successful Energy Efficiency Investment Fund 
supported in part by SEP funds. Last year, the fund provided $9.2 
million across 218 projects, avoiding 69.7 million kWh and 151,540 
MMBtu annually; saving $4.9 million in annual energy costs; and 
reducing 57,429 metric tons of CO2 emissions, equivalent to 12,490 
passenger vehicles driven for 1 year. Each dollar of program funds 
leveraged $5.82 in external investment.
    Illinois-Leverage $16 Million with 79 Percent of Funds Going to EJ 
Communities. The Illinois Energy Office used SEP funds to support 
upgrades at four publicly-owned wastewater treatment plants, leveraging 
$16,018,574 in funds from municipalities and saving 2,431,955 kWh 
annually. Of the funds awarded, 79 percent was granted to facilities 
serving EJ communities.
    Kentucky-Tool to Site Solar Projects at Reclaimed Mines. The 
Kentucky Energy and Environmental Cabinet used SEP to create a web-
based tool that enables users to identify potential solar energy siting 
opportunities in Kentucky, including on previous mine locations. The 
tool was created in response to an increasing number of solar 
developers supporting corporate sustainability goals, and to support 
wholesale market clean energy procurement demand. The tool helps 
developers and landowners assess solar site suitability and makes it 
easy for developers to use GIS Site Suitability Analysis to site solar 
installations on reclaimed minefields. The website includes information 
about land reclamation.
    Maine-Supports Clean Energy, Energy Efficiency, Climate, and COVID 
Coordination. The Maine Governor's Energy Office used SEP funds to 
develop and implement such nation-leading energy initiatives as a 
Statewide energy assessment, the State's first energy storage market 
assessment, clean transportation roadmap, and energy workforce study. 
The office's work is aimed at reducing energy volatility for Maine 
consumers, for instance by advancing the country's first floating 
offshore wind demonstration project and new programs aimed at 
installing 100,000 new high-efficiency air source heat pumps by 2025. 
In 2021, the Governor's Energy Office assisted in the implementation of 
the State's 4-year climate action plan, Maine Won't Wait, outlining how 
Maine will achieve the statutory requirement to reduce greenhouse gas 
emissions of 45 percent by 2030 from 1990 levels and 80 percent by 
2050, achieve carbon neutrality by 2045, and achieve 80 percent 
renewable energy by 2030, while strengthening the economy and doubling 
the number of clean energy jobs in Maine.
    Mississippi-Industrial Energy Efficiency Program. The Mississippi 
State Energy Office used SEP funds to design the Mississippi Industrial 
Energy Efficiency Program to assist the State's manufacturers with 
making energy-efficient upgrades. Projects have resulted in improved 
working conditions for approximately 2,500 employees across a wide 
variety of manufacturers, ranging from catfish processing to HVAC 
component production. Those projects include lighting upgrades, 
compressed air system replacements and building envelope improvements 
that cover over 2.95 million square feet of manufacturing space.
    Montana-Implementing Energy Projects in State-Owned Veteran 
Retirement Homes. The Montana Energy Office leveraged SEP funds to 
upgrade lighting and ventilation systems at Veteran retirement homes in 
Glendive and Columbia Falls. The project surpassed the statutorily-
required cost effectiveness target and increased resident comfort 
through dimmable, high-resolution lighting, which is less disruptive to 
sleep patterns; provides high contrast to lessen risk of slips and 
falls; and increases contrast for people with limited vision.
    New Hampshire-School Energy Cost Savings. Since 2018, New Hampshire 
has used a portion of their SEP funds for the School Energy Efficiency 
Development Program, an annual competitive matching grant that allows 
schools in small communities to complete energy efficiency projects. 
This program's dual purpose to create a safer, healthier learning 
environment for students and staff, and reduce a local school's energy 
costs has been successful. For example, in 2020, $80,000 was awarded to 
the New Boston Central School for LED lighting and controls, resulting 
in 110,812 kWhs of annual electricity savings and $21,000 in annual 
cost savings.
    New Mexico-Advancing Cutting-Edge Sustainable Buildings and EVs. 
The State Energy Office uses SEP funds to support implementation of the 
2021 Sustainable Buildings Tax Credit Program. The program incentivizes 
New Mexico's commitment to cutting-edge sustainable building practices 
including the provision for the installation of energy-conserving 
products in existing commercial and residential buildings-helping to 
improve existing buildings and low income and affordable housing. This 
program advances adoption of EVs through a tax incentive for EV-ready 
buildings-existing, new, commercial, residential-to make EV charging 
available or provide the appropriate electrical upgrades for charger 
installation. The tax incentive also provides bonuses for a fully 
electric house, and/or for meeting net-zero carbon certification, zero 
energy certification, zero waste certification or zero water 
certification.
    North Dakota-Deploy Solar Panels, Bolster Resiliency, Educate 
Students. SEP Funds supported installation of 115 solar panels and an 
inverter at the Bismarck Public Schools Career Academy. In addition to 
powering the building, instructors at the school plan to start 
incorporating the panels into their lessons.
    Oregon. The Oregon Department of Energy utilized a portion of their 
SEP funds to create the Oregon Guidebook for Local Energy Resilience: 
for Small and Medium Electric Utilities, a technical resource for the 
38 consumer-owned electric utilities serving Oregon. The Guidebook will 
help consumer-owned utilities improve local energy resilience through 
business continuity planning; identifying strategic efficiency and 
distributed renewables resilience opportunities; and understanding ways 
to leverage Federal and State emergency management planning efforts. 
The office's resilience policy analyst engaged with consumer-owned 
utilities to share the recommendations and offer guidance to implement 
resilience-focused actions.
    South Carolina-High School Energy, Chemistry, and Supply Chain 
Education. South Carolina uses a portion of its SEP funds to offer 
mini-grants for highly-visible demonstration projects that promote 
emerging energy technologies and innovation. The program targets South 
Carolina's State and local government agencies, public colleges, 
universities and school districts. Last year, seven projects were 
selected, including, for example, the Blythewood High School's Bengal 
Biodiesel grant to help expand the school's Chemistry 2 class where 
students are being taught lab procedures in making B100 biodiesel fuel 
out of waste streams and learning about supply chain logistics. The 
class will be expanded to 75 students and includes workforce issues and 
engaging with equipment manufacturers. The class's B100 will be used in 
school buses and other on-road equipment around the community after 
successful tests in the school's tractor. The project was profiled by 
MotorWeek, the Nation's longest running auto publication.
    Tennessee-Leading the Charge on Transportation Electrification. The 
Tennessee Office of Energy Programs (OEP) used a portion of their SEP 
funds-in partnership with the Tennessee Valley Authority-to support EV 
fast-charging and add 40 priority charging locations in order to double 
the State's fast-charging network. OEP also leveraged SEP funds to 
partner with TN-DOT on the plan for IIJA-funded EV fast-charging. The 
Drive Electric Tennessee Roadmap aims to increase EV adoption to 
200,000 EVs by 2028, up from 18,494 in 2022. This work has been 
foundational to the State's leadership in EV infrastructure and EV-
related manufacturing.
    Washington-Energy Emergency Response. The Washington State Energy 
Office utilized SEP funds to address critical energy emergency 
preparedness and response. In 2021, heavy rain led to flooding and 
landslides, damaging infrastructure in Washington and British Columbia 
resulting in a regional fuel emergency. The State Energy Office led 
efforts to ensure critical fuel deliveries and coordinated with British 
Columbia and the multi-State Western Petroleum Shortage Collaborative 
in response to crude oil refinery closures. The positive outcome was 
the result of planning and coordination at the State, Federal, and 
international levels.
    Wisconsin-Enhancing Energy Security for Local and Tribal 
Governments. The Wisconsin Office of Energy Innovation utilized a 
portion of their SEP funds to enhance energy security for local and 
Tribal governments with its Statewide Assistance for Energy Reliability 
and Resiliency (SAFER2) initiative. The program improves the efficacy 
of Wisconsin's response to long-term energy outages by partnering with 
local governments and Tribal emergency managers to gain a better 
understanding of the resiliency of critical energy infrastructure; 
provide templates for fuel shortage contingency plans; improve cyber-
security awareness; and enhance the understanding of roles and 
responsibilities of both State and local partners during an energy 
emergency?.

    [This statement was submitted by David Terry, Executive Director, 
National 
Association of State Energy Officials.]
                                 ______
                                 
     Prepared Statement of the National Community Action Foundation
    Chairwoman Feinstein, Ranking Member Kennedy and Members of the 
subcommittee: Thank you for this opportunity to present the views of 
the National Community Action Foundation (NCAF) on fiscal year 2023 
appropriations for the Weatherization Assistance Program (WAP), which 
is administered by the Department of Energy.
    Recommendation: We urge the subcommittee to provide the following 
for the fiscal year 2023 Weatherization Assistance Program: the funding 
requested in the President's budget for the core program at no less 
than $362.2 million and $90 million for the Weatherization Readiness 
Fund for a total of $452.2 million. To the extent that budget 
constraints make this recommendation difficult, we urge you to 
prioritize funding the Weatherization Readiness Fund. We also urge the 
subcommittee to reject the proposed ``LIHEAP Advantage'' $100 million 
project for reasons we outline below. We hope your report will provide 
guidance to the Department of Energy regarding better integration of 
the program funded in this appropriation with the soon-to-be-initiated 
program funded by the Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act.
    The National Community Action Foundation (NCAF) represents the 
Nation's local Community Action Agencies, known as CAAs. These agencies 
make up 81 percent of the local agencies that are funded by the WAP to 
recruit and evaluate eligible homes and to install the appropriate set 
of efficiency measures and health or safety improvements. CAAs deeply 
appreciate the subcommittee's long record of support for the 
Weatherization Assistance Program. Your record of oversight and support 
has kept the program strong and effective. We appreciate the trust that 
has been placed in our network to deliver more than $3.5 billion worth 
of energy upgrades to America's most vulnerable energy consumers under 
the Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act (IIJA).
    Status of the Two Weatherization Initiatives as Seen from the 
`Ground': The expanded program funded by IIJA will begin in the late 
fall or early winter of 2022 after DOE approves the plans that States 
must submit by October 1. Since passage of the bipartisan 
Infrastructure bill, we have been informing the Department and Senators 
that the WAP needs changes in DOE policies. These changes were 
described in a bi-partisan House and Senate letter to Secretary 
Granholm, initiated by Senators Reed, Collins, Shaheen and Coons. The 
same four champions of Weatherization also sponsored the statutory 
changes contained in S. 3769--``The Weatherization Assistance Program 
Improvements Act of 2022.'' With planning now underway and a deadline 
three- and one-half months after this testimony, the Department's lack 
of action is increasingly concerning. We hope the subcommittee's 
ongoing oversight can add weight to the recommendations and that your 
entire membership will support the provisions of S. 3769.
    Fortunately, the initial months after full funding becomes 
available will be devoted primarily to recruiting contractors and 
employees who will be trained in the specialized skills the program 
requires of its workforce. The tight labor market in the construction 
field means this period will be especially challenging. CAAs and their 
non-profit partners look forward to recruiting residents of assisted 
communities into these ``green jobs.'' We trust Congress and DOE 
understand this part of the workforce will take longer to train and, 
therefore, will cost more to become fully skilled.
    The fiscal year 2022 appropriated programs in 17 States, which 
started April 1, are proceeding. Plans for the other States' programs, 
which begin July 1, are on track for approval. In these administrative 
functions, DOE has set a shining example of timely issuance of the 
information grantees need to complete applications and of release of 
appropriated funds.
    Also, the recently announced addition of categorical eligibility 
for HUD-assisted properties, which this subcommittee urged DOE to 
achieve, is a major improvement that will progress CAAs' outreach work 
and result in many multi-family buildings being weatherized. Thank you 
for your persistent leadership that achieved this result.
Our Fiscal Year 2023 Recommendations in Depth:
    First, I want to address the question that is sure to emerge in 
times of budget constraints: Why would we need a regular program in 
fiscal year 2023 through fiscal year 2027 when the IIJA program is 
funded and running?
    In short, the two programs are so different that both are required 
to be able to appropriately serve the housing stock in America's most 
disadvantaged communities. The ``regular'' or base program can do work 
that cannot be done with IIJA funds. It is an essential complement. One 
example of the reason both are needed is the as-yet-undefined statutory 
requirement to ``Buy American.'' CAAs vastly prefer to Buy American at 
all times, and we strongly support the policy. However, WAP buys many 
mid-range household appliances, especially efficient refrigerators. 
While GE and Whirlpool (under multiple brand names) manufacture some 
appropriate models in the U.S., agencies often cannot obtain American-
made appliances in many markets in a timely manner. Imports cannot be 
purchased with IIJA funds, so homes in markets with only imports 
available will be weatherized with annual appropriations funds. Also, 
in some rural markets with few willing contractors, it may be necessary 
to use annual appropriations funds to weatherize eligible multi-family 
buildings.
    The Weatherization Readiness Fund at $90 Million: Appropriating the 
Weatherization Readiness Fund at $90 million would allow our agencies 
to repair not only the homes that will be deferred during inspections 
in the fiscal year 2023 program year, but to also repair the tens of 
thousands of dwellings on their ``deferral'' lists awaiting repairs 
because of previous years' inspections.
    The President's Request is woefully inadequate to the backlog of 
deferred eligible homes. In the Budget document, DOE provided research 
showing that the cost to repair the number of anticipated deferred 
homes in the PY2023 program alone was $43.8 million. The Request is 
less than 75 percent of the funds needed, and neither figure allows 
subgrantees to address previously deferred homes. Our members strongly 
believe that, if the Committee must make tradeoffs when considering the 
requested WAP increases, the Readiness Fund should be the highest 
priority.
    Readiness Barriers: Further, DOE prohibits using annual program 
funds in combination with the IIJA funds. This DOE policy must be 
changed. Under current DOE policy, any home that is repaired using 
Weatherization Readiness Funds cannot be weatherized with IIJA funds. 
This prohibition will create impossible real-world stumbling blocks to 
getting the greatly expanded pool of eligible homes retrofitted. 
Further, it means hundreds of thousands of homes of the most 
disadvantaged Americans who live in substandard housing cannot be 
served. This reality is contrary to the government's commitment to 
focusing on families with the greatest disadvantages. The Committee can 
correct this problem by directing DOE to allow a combination of annual 
and IIJA funds.
    The LIHEAP Advantage Request: We cannot recommend the subcommittee 
move forward with the President's funding request for the ``LIHEAP 
Advantage'' initiative. It is a costly project that would ostensibly 
``test'' what is long-standing practice. LIHEAP and Weatherization are 
already inseparably intertwined.
  --Most WAP participants today are LIHEAP recipients referred to the 
        program;
  --More than $400 million a year is transferred by States to the local 
        WAP programs, and;
  --LIHEAP funds measures that DOE cannot fund in most States.
    Our member agencies ``braid'' multiple funding sources, including 
DOE's WAP, LIHEAP, some USDA funding and many utility efficiency 
program funds, to address a single home. With the newly established 
eligibility for HUD assisted buildings, we expect to see HUD programs 
added into these ``braids.''
    Studies on the varieties of long-standing, State and local 
''leveraged' programs and their outcomes were completed in 2014 by Oak 
Ridge National Laboratory. New, nationwide research could be useful as 
part of the planned evaluation of the IIJA program. However, studies of 
a ``pilot'' of these already-widespread practices would not add to the 
whole-program review. Notably, true innovations and pilot efforts are 
already part of the program, and DOE is expected to select winners of 
the first two rounds of Innovation and Enhancement competitive grants 
shortly. These are mandated to occur annually. Duplication is 
unnecessary.
    A Final Point: The LIHEAP Advantage initiative proposes to use 
State Energy Program authority so that the proposed projects can 
provide ``deep retrofits'' not allowable with WAP funds (except with 
Innovation Grant funds). This acknowledges that there is insufficient 
authority under WAP to deliver needed services. This demonstration 
would be a tangential, ineffective way to address the need for a 
higher-impact program. The legislative changes which have been 
incorporated in The Weatherization Assistance Program Improvements Act, 
S. 3769, and its House companion, H.R. 7947, will have the same effect 
along with the proposed regulatory changes DOE must make to cut red 
tape.
    This subcommittee's oversight of the program and your policy 
guidance have been highly supportive of positive changes. Thank you in 
advance for your continuing leadership and support as Community Action 
and its energy partners prepare to accelerate the Weatherization of the 
most inefficient and vulnerable American homes.

    [This statement was submitted by David Bradley, Chief Executive 
Officer, 
National Community Action Foundation.]
                                 ______
                                 
    Prepared Statement of the National Congress of American Indians
    On behalf of the National Congress of American Indians (NCAI), 
thank you for this opportunity to provide testimony on fiscal year 2023 
funding for the Department of Energy (DOE), Department of Defense 
(DOD)--U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (USACE), and Department of the 
Interior (DOI)--Bureau of Reclamation (BOR), involving our 
recommendation of $408.84 million in funding.
    A 2007 report by Dr. Theodore Jojola, Ph.D., developed for the NCAI 
Policy Research Center, found that underinvestment in physical 
infrastructure not only harms the social, physical, and mental 
wellbeing of Tribal communities, but also impairs the ability of Tribal 
communities to thrive.\1\ Physical infrastructure reinforces and shapes 
the socio-cultural and political milieu of the community and plays a 
role in competitively positioning the economy of its enterprises for 
capital gain.\2\ The provision and placement of basic utilities for the 
adequate provision of drinking water, sanitation, and electricity are 
considered fundamental for the physical and mental health of 
communities as well as being a measure of the overall quality of 
life.\3\ Further, there is a strong link between physical 
infrastructure and economic development.\4\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \1\ NCAI Policy Research Center, Physical Infrastructure and 
Economic Development, May 2007, 3-4, available at: https://
www.ncai.org/attachments/PolicyPaper_OAYcOPFdNTxazqx
AOZGImEXOHFGoAnZlOepYZcUnSqRGgoWUTLp_Jojola percent20and percent20Gover 
percent20FINAL percent20FORMATTED percent205.8.07.pdf, accessed on: May 
25, 2022.
    \2\ Id. at 2.
    \3\ Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human 
Rights, The Human Right to Adequate Housing, Fact Sheet No. 21/Rev.1, 
available at: https://www.ohchr.org/sites/default/files/Documents/
Publications/FS21_rev_1_Housing_en.pdf, accessed on: May 25, 2022.
    \4\ Physical Infrastructure and Economic Development at 2.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    Unfortunately, the conditions noted by Dr. Jojola in 2007 have 
persisted, with the U.S. Commission on Civil Rights (USCCR) finding in 
2018 that the efforts undertaken by the Federal Government from its 
initial 2003 report to 2018 have resulted in only minor improvements, 
at best; and in some respects, the U.S. Government has backslid in its 
treatment of Native Americans.\5\ Specifically, the USCCR report notes 
that many Native Americans face unique challenges and harsh living 
conditions resulting from the United States having removed their Tribal 
Nations to locations without access to adequate resources and basic 
infrastructure upon which their Tribal governments can foster thriving 
communities.\6\ In its 2003 report, USCCR summarized the funding 
shortfall to which Native Americans were subjected stating that, ``laws 
and policies are meaningless without resources to enforce them. 
Resources are an important demonstration of the U.S. government's 
commitment to its responsibilities, including the obligation to 
preserve civil and other rights . . . [u]nder-funding violates the 
basic tenets of the trust relationship between the [Federal] Government 
and Native peoples and perpetuates a civil rights crisis in Indian 
Country.'' \7\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \5\ U.S. Commission on Civil Rights, Broken Promises: Continuing 
Federal Funding Shortfall for Native Americans, 3-4, available at: 
https://www.usccr.gov/files/pubs/2018/12-20-Broken-Promises.pdf, 
accessed on: May 25, 2022.
    \6\ Id. at 1.
    \7\ Id. at 2.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    Cross-referencing Office of Management and Budget (OMB) Native 
American Crosscut data with Appropriations Committee reports reveals 
that fiscal year 2022 spending for Native American programs represents 
approximately 0.49 percent of total regular appropriations budget 
authority within this subcommittee's jurisdiction. With Federal 
investment metrics such as these, it is no surprise that Indian Country 
is in a State of catastrophe by national standards.
    Despite this chronic underinvestment, Indian Country is an 
important economic driver in the U.S. Economy.\8\ Collectively, Tribal 
Nations comprise the 13 largest employers in the United States, with 
Tribal businesses employing more than 700,000 employees, providing 
economic opportunity for both Native and non-Native workers.\9\ 
Evidence indicates that where Tribal Nations are successful with 
economic development that poverty rates and other health issues are 
lower, while educational outcomes and real per capita income are 
higher.\10\ Further, revenue generated on Tribal lands results in a 
spillover effect that supports local workforces and generates tax 
revenue.\11\ As such, an investment to promote the building blocks of 
physical infrastructure in Indian Country is an investment in America 
for all Americans.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \8\ Patrice H. Kunesh, Getting real about Indian Country--
surprising progress in the heartland, https://indiancountrytoday.com/
opinion/getting-real-about-indian-country-surprising-progress-in-the-
heartland, Accessed: April 6, 2022.
    \9\ Id.
    \10\ Id.
    \11\ Id.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
                          department of energy
    Cross-referencing OMB Native American Crosscut data with 
Appropriations Committee reports reveals that spending for Native 
American programs represents approximately 0.19 percent of total fiscal 
year 2022 regular appropriations budget authority for DOE within this 
subcommittee's jurisdiction. By comparison, for every $100 appropriated 
to DOE, less than two dimes go to Indian Country. While this statistic 
is shocking, the fiscal year 2022 omnibus represents more than twice 
the investment in DOE Native American programs as the previous 2 years 
and more than four times the investment of FYs 2018 and 2019. This does 
not mean that Tribal programs are now adequately funded--it is a signal 
that funding for Tribal programs at DOE has been so woefully inadequate 
for so long that even increasing funding by four times still only 
equals a fraction of a penny of every dollar appropriated to the Agency 
by this subcommittee.
    In order to address these funding deficiencies, this subcommittee 
should provide at least $150 million for the Office of Indian Energy 
Policy and Programs, including resources for the feasibility studies, 
assessments, planning, and financial and technical assistance necessary 
to create a pipeline of projects for underutilized programs with 
prohibitive cost barriers such as the Tribal Energy Loan Guarantee 
Program (TELGP); at least $2.5 million for TELGP credit subsidies and 
$2 million for TELGP Administrative Costs; $15.9 million for the Office 
of Legacy Management Legacy Sites in and around Indian Country; and 
$5.3 million for the National Nuclear Security Administration's Tribal 
College and University Advanced Manufacturing Initiative.
                         bureau of reclamation
    Indian water rights are vested rights and resources for which the 
United States has a trust responsibility. The U.S. Supreme Court first 
recognized Indian water rights in Winters v. United States in 1908.\12\ 
Under the Winters doctrine, when Congress reserves land, Congress 
implicitly reserves water sufficient to fulfill the purpose of the 
reservation and the water rights of Tribes often are senior to non-
Indian water rights holders.\13\ In Arizona v. California, the Supreme 
Court ruled that Tribal Nations have rights to enough water to 
cultivate every irrigable acre on a reservation.\14\ However, despite 
the priority of Indian reserved water rights, non-Indian populations 
frequently have greater access to and allocations of water through 
infrastructure, leading to disputes that typically have been litigated 
and/or resolved by negotiated settlements.\15\ The adjudication of 
these rights is complex and costly for Tribal Nations, spanning an 
average of 22 years.\16\ The Infrastructure Investments and Jobs Act of 
2021 (IIJA) established the Indian Water Rights Settlement Completion 
Fund to satisfy Tribal water settlement obligations as authorized by 
Congress, along with the mandatory funding for Indian water rights 
settlements from the Reclamation Water Settlement Fund authorized 
through fiscal year 2029; \17\ however, the amount does not include the 
cost of ongoing operation requirements for existing settlements and 
excludes future water settlements or court orders.\18\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \12\ Winters v. United States, 207 U.S. 564, 575-77 (1908).
    \13\ See Winters v. United States.
    \14\ Arizona v. California, 373 U.S. 546 (1963).
    \15\ Congressional Research Service, Bureau of Reclamation: 
History, Authorities, and Issues for Congress, R46303, available at: 
https://crsreports.congress.gov/product/pdf/R/R46303, accessed on: May 
26, 2022.
    \16\ L. Sanchez, E. Edwards, and B. Leonard, Beyond ``paper'' 
water: The complexities of full leveraging Tribal water rights, 
available at: https://www.minneapolisfed.org/article/2022/beyond-paper-
water-the-complexities-of-fully-leveraging-tribal-water-rights, 
accessed on: May 25, 2022.
    \17\ Bureau of Reclamation, Fiscal Year 2023 Congressional 
Justification, Permanent Appropriations--5, available at: https://
www.usbr.gov/budget/2023/FY-2023-Bureau-of-Reclamation-Budget-
Justifications.pdf, accessed on: May 26, 2022.
    \18\ Id. at General Statement--2.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    BOR has trust and treaty obligations to Tribal Nations to promote 
and protect their water rights.\19\ This subcommittee must provide at 
least $34 million for ongoing operational needs of Indian water 
settlements in fiscal year 2023; at least $100 million for developing, 
managing, and protecting Tribal water and related resources; and work 
with authorizing committees to provide a permanent mandatory funding 
solution for future Indian water rights settlements and for the 
operation and maintenance of previously enacted Indian water rights 
settlements.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \19\ See Generally Seminole Nation v. United States, 316 U.S. 286 
(1942); Winters v. United States; Arizona v. California.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
                      u.s. army corps of engineers
    USACE implements the Tribal Partnership Program (TPP), which 
provides an opportunity to assist with water resources projects that 
address economic, environmental, and cultural resource needs including 
flood damage reduction, environmental restoration, and protection and 
preservation of natural and cultural resources. Tribal relations with 
USACE have been historically contentious as well as under-resourced, 
leading to the underutilization of TPP. Congress should provide $17 
million for the TPP with at least $5 million for investigations and $12 
million for construction and provide $3 million for the Tribal Nations 
Program-which implements the Army Corps' Tribal Policy Principles-to 
conduct outreach, consultation, and improve partnerships and relations 
with Tribal Nations.
                               conclusion
    Tribal Nations have paid for every penny obligated to Indian 
Country hundreds of times over by providing this Nation with our land. 
In order to uphold this Nation's promises to its people, it must first 
uphold its promises to this land's First Peoples. We must continue down 
the path of Nation-to-Nation growth, so that all of our people may 
flourish.

    [This statement was submitted by Larry Wright, Jr., Director of 
Leadership 
Engagement, National Congress of American Indians.]
                                 ______
                                 
       Prepared Statement of the National Hydropower Association
    The National Hydropower Association (NHA) respectfully requests 
$222,000,000 for the Department of Energy's (DOE) Water Power 
Technologies Office (WPTO) in the Fiscal Year 2023 Energy and Water 
Development Appropriations measure. NHA recommends $85,000,000 for 
hydropower and $137,000,000 for marine energy. NHA also supports robust 
funding for the operations and maintenance (O&M) programs of the U.S. 
Army Corps of Engineers (USACE) and Bureau of Reclamation (BuRec) to 
increase capacity and generation at their facilities, addressing the 
billions of dollars of backlogged O&M needs.
    Funding Justification.--The U.S. water power sector has tremendous 
beneficial impacts on our Nation's electric grid, the economy, and 
environment. In 2020, hydropower delivered almost 40 percent of total 
U.S. renewable electricity generation and pumped storage projects 
provided 93 percent of total energy storage in the country. Hydropower 
also avoids approximately 200 million metric tons of CO2 
emissions each year. In addition to providing affordable, renewable 
power to the grid, hydropower and pumped storage help integrate greater 
amounts of variable renewable generation, such as wind and solar, while 
maintaining grid reliability and resilience. Finally, the water power 
industry employs more than 60,000 Americans, creating good-paying jobs 
in communities across the country.
    The water power sector is poised to do even more to support a 100 
percent clean energy future. The U.S. has significant underutilized 
water power resources, including non-powered dams, conduits, new pumped 
storage potential, and untapped marine energy. Advancement of new and 
innovative technologies, operations, and approaches to harness these 
resources in a globally competitive marketplace is enhanced by Federal 
funding that augments research, development, and deployment (RD&D) 
efforts being led by industry with support from universities and the 
National Labs. A growing U.S. water power sector will support efforts 
to address climate change and reduce carbon emissions, assist in grid 
reliability and resiliency, while also advancing our National economic 
goals. Significant increases in funding for the WPTO is critical and 
will help create high-value employment and support businesses across 
the country that comprise the water power supply chain.
    NHA commends Congress for its increased support of the DOE WPTO in 
recent years, culminating in the $162,000,000 appropriation in fiscal 
year 2022. While a step in the right direction, this funding is well 
below other DOE renewable programs. Policymakers, including many on 
this committee, had the foresight to make significant and sustained 
Federal technology RD&D investments in the wind and solar industries. 
Thanks to these prudent investments, wind and solar technologies 
improved and the costs for deploying them went down. Today, the wind 
and solar industries are developing utility scale projects. A ``solar-
scale'' level of Federal investment for advanced water power 
technologies is required to accelerate the pace of demonstrations and 
deployments, reduce costs, and increase adoption along a similar 
trajectory of more mature renewables.
    Overview of DOE Water Power Technologies Office Investments.--
Congress reauthorized DOE's water power activities through passage of 
the Water Power R&D Act of 2020 and the Reliable Investment in Vital 
Energy Reauthorization Act (RIVER Act). These WPTO investments support 
innovation of advanced technologies to increase power production and 
reduce costs, improve grid reliability and resilience, create new 
market opportunities that improve economic growth, and fund cross-
institutional foundational research to support workforce development. 
Increased WPTO funding will help the United States achieve its clean 
energy goals through the development of new water power energy 
generation resources.
    Hydropower.--NHA requests $85,000,000 for the hydropower program. 
Hydropower is a proven renewable electricity resource, accounting for 
nearly 7 percent of all U.S. electricity production. Increased WPTO 
investments could significantly expand electricity generation from this 
resource.
    Growth opportunities for hydropower in the U.S. include adding 
generation to non- powered dams. Currently, only 3 percent of the 
approximately 90,000 existing dams in the U.S. generate electricity. 
Other opportunities include increasing efficiencies and expanding 
capacity at existing hydropower projects, new pumped storage 
facilities, and new small hydro development. Pumped storage represents 
a significant opportunity because it provides ancillary services that 
ensure grid reliability, is the only proven long-duration energy 
storage system in the United States, and can integrate intermittent 
renewable generation resources on the grid.
    The WPTO invests in hydropower technology RD&D for innovative, 
standardized, and modular approaches to hydropower development that can 
lower project costs compared to traditional development which requires 
site specific engineering. For small hydropower, the WPTO supports 
standardization of new turbine designs, as well as new advanced 
materials and manufacturing across the sector, including applications 
at non-powered dams, irrigation channels, and other waterways, 
including greenfield sites. This work increases generation 
opportunities with innovations that also improve environmental 
performance. It also helps reduce costs for companies that have 
capitalization challenges to fund this work. The WPTO supports DOE's 
Advanced Energy Storage Initiative and focuses on the role of 
hydropower and pumped storage in grid reliability and resiliency by 
supporting innovative technologies and conducting new research to 
evaluate and improve the flexibility and grid services provided by 
these projects. The WPTO also supports development of innovative 
environmental mitigation technologies, such as novel fish passage 
systems and other advancements.
    Marine Energy.--NHA requests $137,000,000 for the marine energy 
program. Marine energy is a carbon-free, renewable resource that can 
make a material contribution to decarbonize our domestic energy 
portfolio. The DOE recently found that marine energy has the technical 
potential to provide 2,300 TWhs a year of electricity generation in the 
United States--the equivalent to 57 percent of 2019 energy consumption.
    Marine energy is widespread, consistent, reliable, energy dense, 
and can be generated close to large urban centers with significant 
load. Marine energy technologies are rapidly innovating, with a number 
of systems globally nearing commercialization, but Congress must invest 
additional resources in this sector to ensure its future domestic 
viability and to keep cutting-edge development in the United States.
    Last year, NHA's Marine Energy Council (MEC) released a 
Commercialization Strategy for Marine Energy. The strategy sets 
technology deployment targets, starting with 50 megawatts by 2025, 
which are the critical first steps for the domestic marine energy 
sector to materially contribute to the effort against climate change. 
Follow on targets include 500 megawatts by 2030 and 1 gigawatt by 2035. 
To achieve these targets, Federal policymakers must:
  --Dramatically increase technology advancement and testing support;
  --Establish a clear, timely, and predictable regulatory framework for 
        marine energy projects; and,
  --Implement a fair incentive regime structure that facilitates volume 
        manufacturing and rapid market deployment.
    The WPTO supports industry-led RD&D for marine energy systems and 
subsystems ultimately leading to reduced costs and increased 
deployments. The WPTO validates the reliability of marine energy 
technologies and the value of integrating energy from prototype devices 
into the electric grid and Blue Economy applications. These funds 
provide risk mitigation, technical advancement and review, and early 
market growth opportunities.
    There are wide ranges of design approaches to marine energy 
systems. It is likely that different designs will be most effective in 
diverse resource areas or for various market applications. Increased 
funding is required to support the design, construction, and validation 
of marine energy systems in open water deployments and alongside 
offshore co-location opportunities, with a balanced approach across 
resource areas that reflects the higher funding requirements of more 
mature designs.
    Marine energy technologies also present unique engineering 
challenges that require collaborative foundational innovations by 
cross-institution teams of researchers. NHA urges dedicated funding for 
National Marine Energy Center operations and continuation of support 
for foundational research activities led by universities and other 
research institutions affiliated with the Centers to accelerate 
development of the marine energy sector and help train a skilled 
workforce for the Labs and industry.
    In addition, a key barrier to marine energy technology development 
is the difficulty of testing new designs. Funding is needed to 
establish and expand testing infrastructure including open-water test 
centers, such as PacWave, along with other capabilities. Funds are also 
needed to conduct the tests, through regular and consistent Funding 
Opportunity Announcements and the TEAMER program, along with 
environmental monitoring technologies and research to expedite 
permitting and in-water demonstration. NHA also recommends continued 
close coordination with other agency partners, including the U.S. Navy 
on national security applications for marine energy devices at the Wave 
Energy Test Site in Hawaii.
    Finally, marine energy systems can also be a cost-effective and 
reliable power source in several distributed Blue Economy markets, such 
as aquaculture, desalination, oil and gas production, underwater data 
centers, and other emerging needs. However, prototypes must be tailored 
to specific applications and their performance demonstrated to 
facilitate adoption in these markets. NHA urges continued funding of 
the WPTO Powering the Blue Economy activities.
    Other Recommendations.--NHA recommends that DOE lead an effort with 
FERC, USACE, BuRec, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, 
and other Federal resource agencies to review and provide 
recommendations on how to address the amount of time, effort, and 
funding that is required to permit, license, and relicense marine 
energy projects.
    Finally, NHA urges Congress to increase funding to USACE and BuRec 
to operate, maintain, and upgrade their existing projects, as well as 
to add non-federal hydropower development to their non-powered 
infrastructure. NHA also believes there are ways to make this 
investment that do not increase costs to the power customers. The 
Federal hydropower system makes up approximately half of U.S. 
hydropower generation. Many of these projects are candidates for 
upgrades and/or have backlogged O&M needs. USACE and BuRec projects 
make the Federal Government itself one of the largest renewable energy 
providers in the country. Reinvesting in these projects will help to 
address climate change, provide economic and job opportunities, and 
maximize the benefits of this public infrastructure.
    Sincerely.

    [This statement was submitted by Malcolm Woolf, President and CEO, 
National Hydropower Association.]
                                 ______
                                 
              Prepared Statement of The Nature Conservancy
    Chairwoman Feinstein, Ranking Member Kennedy and members of the 
subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to present The Nature 
Conservancy's (TNC's) testimony on fiscal year (FY) 2023 appropriations 
for the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (Corps), Bureau of Reclamation 
(Reclamation) and Department of Energy (DOE).
    TNC thanks the subcommittee for its attention to the water 
resources needs of the country, especially including past support for 
natural infrastructure, which the Corps and Reclamation can use to 
enhance water infrastructure and improve environmental outcomes. Using 
natural infrastructure provides effective and cost-effective multi-
benefit solutions to many water resource management problems. TNC also 
applauds the subcommittee's past commitments to vital clean energy 
technology research, development and deployment programs. These 
programs are a critical pillar of efforts to reduce greenhouse gas 
emissions and avoid the worst effects of climate change. TNC strongly 
encourages the subcommittee to continue to support natural 
infrastructure and clean energy programs again in FY23.
                      u.s. army corps of engineers
    Sustainable Rivers Program (SRP): SRP is an initiative to modernize 
the operations of the Nation's reservoirs to enhance water supply, 
flood protection, hydropower generation and recreation, while restoring 
critical ecosystems and the economically valuable services they 
provide. The challenges related to providing water supply and flood 
protection are growing and will only increase due to climate change. 
SRP works collaboratively with local communities, water stakeholders, 
States and other Federal agencies to update decades-old water 
management practices to better meet society's needs. With increased 
funding in FY20-FY22, the Corps has been able to significantly expand 
the program from 16 rivers--encompassing 66 reservoirs and 5,083 
downstream river miles--to 43 rivers--encompassing more than 90 
reservoirs and nearly 12,500 downstream river miles, while still not 
being able to meet the demand for the program within the Corps. In 
FY22, the Corps was able to fund only 40 percent of requests from Corps 
districts for SRP involvement. TNC requests you increase funding to 
$7.5 million for SRP in FY23.
    Navigation and Ecosystem Sustainability Program (NESP): NESP is an 
important, dual-purpose program that allows the Corps to address both 
navigation and ecosystem restoration in an integrated approach along 
the upper Mississippi and Illinois rivers. Past committee support led 
to $5 million in pre-construction engineering and design (PED) funding 
in the Corps' fiscal year 2021 work plan. Then the Infrastructure 
Investment and Jobs Act (IIJA) FY22 work plan moved NESP into 
construction and provided $732 million for Lock and Dam 25 replacement 
and $97.1 million for fish passage at Lock and Dam 22. TNC requests the 
subcommittee continue its strong support for NESP by providing it $84 
million in FY23, including $35 million for ecosystem restoration and 
$49 million for PED at LaGrange Lock and Dam.
    Chesapeake Bay Oyster Recovery: Ongoing oyster restoration work has 
functionally restored several tributaries in Virginia and Maryland and 
demonstrates that strong partnerships between private, State and 
Federal agencies can accomplish tangible outcomes in the Chesapeake 
Bay. TNC requests $5 million in FY23 to continue the essential work of 
restoring the eastern oyster.
    Engineering With Nature: The Corps' Engineering With Nature (EWN) 
initiative is using a collaborative, science-based approach to better 
deliver a full range of economic, social, and environmental benefits 
from water resources infrastructure. It is leading work to share, train 
and support Corps districts and other partners how to effectively 
develop nature-based projects. Its innovative approaches are building 
more resilient communities and a healthier environment. We urge you to 
maintain funding for EWN at $16.25 million in FY23 in its own budget 
line.
    South Florida Ecosystem Restoration (SFER) Program: Congress made a 
historic investment last year to advance Everglades restoration 
projects, increasing funding for SFER to $350 million in FY22, a $100 
million increase over FY21, and investing almost $1.1 billion in SFER 
as part of the IIJA. With some of the largest and most important 
restoration projects now underway, TNC encourages increased funding for 
authorized Comprehensive Everglades Restoration Plan and SFER projects. 
In order to complete authorized projects and keep pace with state 
investments, TNC requests $725 million for SFER in FY23.
    Continuing Authorities Programs: TNC supports the Continuing 
Authorities Programs that promote ecosystem restoration and the use of 
nature-based solutions, including beneficial uses of dredged material 
(Section 204), aquatic ecosystem restoration (Section 206) and project 
modifications for improvement of the environment (Section 1135). In 
addition, WRDA 2020 clarified that small flood control projects 
(Section 205) can use natural and nature-based features. For FY23, TNC 
urges you, at a minimum, to maintain funding for these programs at 
their FY22 enacted levels.
    In addition, TNC supports the following projects and programs and 
requests your support for them at the FY23 requested level.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
           Project/Program                  Account       Budget Request
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Brandon Road Lock and Dam, Aquatic                     Constr$47,880,500
 Nuisance Species Barrier, IL.......
Claiborne and Millers Ferry Locks        Investigations         $400,000
 and Dams (Fish Passage), Lower
 Alabama River......................
Hatchie/Loosahatchie Habitat             Investigations         $400,000
 Restoration (Tennessee and
 Arkansas)..........................
Upper Mississippi River Restoration                    Constr$55,000,000
 Program............................
------------------------------------------------------------------------

                         bureau of reclamation
    Upper Colorado River Endangered Fish Recovery and San Juan River 
Basin Recovery Programs: These programs take a balanced approach to 
recovering four threatened and endangered fish species by implementing 
a range of basin-wide strategies, including improved management of 
Federal dams and irrigation infrastructure, river and floodplain 
habitat improvement, stocking of endangered fish, and management of 
non-native fish species. These efforts provide Endangered Species Act 
compliance for more than 2,500 water projects. TNC supports the budget 
request for these programs, which includes $7.655 million for the 
Endangered Species Recovery Implementation Program (Upper Colorado and 
San Juan River Basin) and $21.4 million for the Colorado River 
Compliance Activities account.
    WaterSMART and Drought Response Programs: In 2020, Congress 
modified the WaterSMART Program to allow grants to non-profit 
organizations working with traditional grant recipients, provide higher 
levels of match for multi-purpose projects, and support nature-based 
solutions. These changes will help prioritize projects that both 
enhance water delivery reliability and benefit watershed health. 
Nevertheless, we remain concerned that some projects funded through 
WaterSMART grants can increase consumptive use of water, which makes 
water shortages worse. TNC requests your continued oversight of the 
grants by including report language similar to the FY20 bill (Senate 
Report 116-102 at page 65). That language directed ``Reclamation to 
ensure that all projects funded under 42 U.S.C. 10364 are in compliance 
with 42 U.S.C. 10364(a)(3)(B) and to articulate the use of the 
conserved water with its annual award announcements.''
    Similarly, grants associated with Reclamation's Drought Response 
Program frequently fund new groundwater pumping. Given that development 
of a permanent or long-term new water supply through groundwater 
pumping is contrary to the other purposes of WaterSMART--to conserve 
water, build ecological resilience to the impacts of climate change, 
and provide environmental benefit--TNC requests your oversight to 
ensure Reclamation prioritizes other drought resilience strategies over 
new groundwater pumping.
    Cooperative Watershed Management Program: The Cooperative Watershed 
Management Program provides funding to support on-the-ground capacity 
to develop, plan, and design watershed management projects. With the 
passage of the IIJA, funding for these capacity-building activities is 
more important than ever, as stakeholders often need dedicated 
resources to prepare projects at a more impactful scale. TNC requests 
full funding for the Cooperative Watershed Management at $20 million in 
FY23.
                       u.s. department of energy
    TNC supports robust funding for multiple DOE programs that 
accelerate the advancement of clean energy technologies and facilitate 
the department's shift in focus toward decarbonization of the U.S. 
economy. This includes programs that were created or reauthorized by 
the Energy Act of 2020 and the IIJA. We encourage Congress to 
adequately resource community consultation processes across the 
Department's technology deployment programs, with specific emphasis in 
the Office of Clean Energy Demonstrations. Agency staffing for such 
work must be adequate to the complexity of the issues and the health, 
economic and civic capacity needs of underserved communities must be 
foregrounded in developing these projects.
    Solar and Wind Energy Technologies: TNC requests full funding to 
support the overall research, development and deployment mission of 
these critical energy technology offices, including $420 million for 
the Solar Technology Office and $420 million for the Wind Technology 
Office.
    Clean Energy Demonstration Projects: TNC requests at least $250 
million in FY23 funding to support the newly established Office of 
Clean Energy Demonstrations for technology-neutral solicitations 
focused on crosscutting energy challenges. We recommend the Office of 
Clean Energy Demonstrations prioritize technology demonstrations for 
the highest emitting sectors.
    Industrial Energy Innovation Research and Development: To develop a 
robust portfolio of emerging technologies, TNC requests $650 million 
for industrial decarbonization activities, including $344 million for 
Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy, $281 million for Fossil Energy 
and Carbon Management, and $25 million for the Office of Science.
    Advanced Nuclear Energy: TNC requests full funding in FY23 for two 
critical programs established under the Energy Act of 2020: $300 
million for the Advanced Nuclear Fuel Availability Program and $250 
million for the Advanced Reactor Demonstration Program, including 
funding all year-three demonstration and risk reduction cost-share 
requirements in the proposals selected by DOE.
    Electric Power Grid Modernization: TNC supports robust funding for 
several programs to implement DOE's Building a Better Grid Initiative. 
This request includes $600 million for the Smart Grid Investment 
Program and $500 million for the Transmission Facilitation Program. We 
also encourage the committee to include language directing the 
Secretary of Energy to facilitate the development of the Office of Grid 
Deployment, as authorized by the IIJA.
    Carbon Capture, Utilization and Storage (CCUS) and Carbon Removal: 
TNC supports robust funding for the Office of Fossil Energy and Carbon 
Management's (FECM) mission to advance the deployment of a full suite 
of carbon management technologies. TNC requests $607.5 million for CCUS 
and Power Systems. This amount would support DOE's research, 
development and deployment efforts for carbon capture, carbon 
utilization, carbon storage, and FECM's contributions to the broader 
carbon dioxide removal crosscut program.
    Advanced Vehicle Technologies: TNC supports robust funding to help 
advance the decarbonization of the transportation sector or the 
development of new zero-carbon fuels for transportation and other end 
uses. To that end, we request $602.731 million for the Vehicle 
Technologies Office.
    Loan Programs Office: TNC supports the role of the DOE Loan 
Programs Office (LPO) in spurring commercialization and deployment of 
emerging technologies by providing loans and loan guarantees. TNC 
requests $160 million for the Title 17 Innovative Technology Loan 
Guarantee Program to expand loan authority by $16 billion; $300 million 
for Advanced Technology Vehicles Manufacturing Loan Program (ATVM), and 
$20 million for the Tribal Energy Loan Guarantee Program to cover 
credit subsidy cost or loan guarantees and direct loans. This request 
aims to provide additional loan authority, credit subsidy funding, and 
program eligibility tweaks to further improve LPO's ability to finance 
innovative energy and manufacturing projects in the United States and 
help fund community grant-making and technical assistance for clean 
energy planning.

    [This statement was submitted by Jimmy Hague, Senior Water Policy 
Advisor, The Nature Conservancy.]
                                 ______
                                 
         Prepared Statement of the Nuclear Energy Institute \1\
    The strategic R&D investments directed by this Committee have 
helped the U.S. reclaim its position as the global leader in nuclear 
energy innovation. To sustain the undeniable momentum toward widespread 
deployment of the technological breakthroughs enabled by these 
investments, NEI recommends a minimum of $2.6 billion for Office of 
Nuclear Energy (NE) programs in fiscal year 2023. Recommendations for 
specific program elements are set forth below. The funding level for 
those DOE NE program elements that are not discussed below should be 
consistent with or greater than fiscal year 2022. Recommendations are 
also provided for specific programs within the Office of Clean Energy 
Demonstrations, NNSA, the Office of Science, and the NRC.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \1\ NEI is responsible for establishing nuclear industry policy on 
matters affecting the nuclear energy industry, including the regulatory 
aspects of generic operational and technical issues. NEI members 
include entities licensed to operate commercial nuclear power plants in 
the United States, nuclear plant designers, major architect/engineering 
firms, fuel cycle facilities, nuclear material licensees, and other 
organizations and entities involved in the nuclear energy industry.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    This increased investment is consistent with achieving first-of-a-
kind operations of advanced nuclear reactors by 2030 and supporting the 
increased use of nuclear energy to achieve a reliable, affordable, 
decarbonized grid by mid-century or sooner. Congress should also 
continue to provide adequate funding necessary to meet commitments to 
affected communities and States conducting cleanup of DOE's shutdown 
uranium enrichment facilities and former nuclear weapons material 
production facilities.
    DOE Office of Clean Energy Demonstrations.--We thank Congress for 
its continued support for the two ARDP projects and the establishment 
of the Office of Clean Energy Demonstrations.
Advanced Reactor Demonstration Program (FY23 Recommendation--$70 
        million).
    Microreactor Demonstration Program (FY23 Recommendation--$30 
million).--NEI recommends establishing a new demonstration focused on 
rapid deployment of microreactors. The total program cost would be $150 
million.
                      doe office of nuclear energy
    Advanced Reactor Demonstration Program (FY23 Recommendation--$235 
million).--The ARDP program is helping develop a pipeline of 
technologies for demonstration and NRIC is supporting demonstrations 
and deployment. NEI recommends: Risk reduction for future 
demonstrations: $140 million, NRIC: $75 million, Regulatory 
Development: $15 million and Advanced Reactor Safeguards: $5 million.
    Advanced SMR R&D Support (FY23 Recommendation--$211 million).--
Demonstrating the next generation of advanced light water small modular 
reactors will support both domestic deployment and export of U.S. 
technology and enable broad U.S. leadership in new technologies.
    Light Water Reactor Sustainability (FY23 Recommendation--$62 
million).--Increased funding will enable the program to accelerate LWR 
modernization efforts while continuing to support hydrogen 
demonstrations. Not less than $12 million should be used to support new 
or previously awarded hydrogen demonstration projects.
    Advanced Reactor Technologies (FY23 Recommendation--$70 million).--
NEI recommends the funding level for the microreactor program and 
MARVEL should be a minimum of $16 million and $20 million, 
respectively. The latter will support fuel acquisition and construction 
in FY23. The ARC-20 program should be funded at $15 million.
Versatile Test Reactor (FY23 Recommendation--$45 million)
    Accident Tolerant Fuels (FY23 Recommendation--$165 million).--The 
industry is working aggressively to accelerate the commercial 
development, testing, and licensing of accident tolerant fuels. $120 
million is recommended to continue the participation of the industry-
led teams in the cost-shared R&D program including support for the 
testing, code development, and licensing of ATF with higher fuel 
utilization, $10 million is recommended to continue silicon-carbide 
development, and $35 million is for laboratory specific work in support 
of ATF.
    Advanced Nuclear Fuel Availability Program (FY23 Recommendation--
$360 million: $300 million for commercial enrichment and deconversion 
capacity and $60 million for downblending of HEU).--Russia, the only 
commercial supplier of HALEU, is no longer a viable supplier. The 
urgency to develop a domestic HALEU supply chain has increased and an 
alternate short-term supply of HALEU must be found to bridge the gap 
before domestic capacity is available, or else current demonstration 
projects will be at risk. Therefore, $300 million is requested for FY23 
to support the deployment of a competitive commercial HALEU supply 
chain in the U.S. in the coming years. In the meantime, the fastest 
path to support near-term needs is a fresh HEU downblending bridge 
program. For FY23, $60 million is requested for the bridge program. The 
total cost of a downblending bridge program is expected to be less than 
$160 million.
TRISO Fuel and Graphite Qualification (FY23 Recommendation--$37 
        million)
Gateway for Accelerated Innovation in Nuclear (FY23 Recommendation--$10 
        million)
    High Enriched Uranium Recovery from EBR-II spent fuel (FY23 
Recommendation--$25.75 million).--This funding level is requested to 
transition EBR-II spent fuel processing operations to seven days a 
week, 24 hours a day to meet the needs of the industry.
    Nuclear Waste Disposal (FY23 Recommendation--$100 million).--The 
estimated taxpayer liability for DOE's failure to satisfy its 
obligation under the NWPA has reached over $40 billion with almost $9 
billion already being paid from the Judgment Fund. The funding for 
Nuclear Waste Disposal should be increased substantially and DOE should 
be directed to re-establish an organization to resume management of the 
program and to begin implementation of an integrated nuclear waste 
management system that allows for private consolidated interim spent 
fuel storage approaches.
    Directed R&D and University Programs (FY23 Recommendation--$161 
million).--Direct funding for university programs provides stability 
for all programs. We support DOE's proposal to create the new program 
line that includes NEUP, SBIR/STTR, and TCF.
    International Nuclear Energy Cooperation (FY23 Recommendation--$10 
million).--The Office of Nuclear Energy plays a critical role in 
facilitating international nuclear energy cooperation. This is critical 
to promoting the adoption of U.S. nuclear technologies abroad, 
assisting allies and partners in achieving their energy security and 
climate goals while creating American jobs and promoting U.S. 
leadership in nuclear safety, security and nonproliferation.
    Program direction (FY23 Recommendation--$100 million).--The 
responsibilities that DOE NE is managing have increased substantially 
over the last few years while the staffing levels have reduced and 
program direction funding has remained roughly constant. This 
confluence of events has created challenges in many areas including 
contracting management and execution. An increase in program direction 
funding is necessary to ameliorate these issues.
    DOE Office of International Affairs (FY23 Recommendation--$62 
million).--The Office of International Affairs plays a vital role in 
enhancing global energy security and increasing U.S. energy exports and 
trade. Given the important role that nuclear energy plays in achieving 
these objectives, industry encourages prioritization of nuclear energy 
cooperation in close coordination with the Office of Nuclear Energy.
    NNSA--Uranium Reserve (FY23 Recommendation--$150 million).--The 
uranium reserve will create a national security strategic stockpile and 
preserve critical fuel cycle capabilities.
    Nuclear Regulatory Commission (FY23 Recommendation--$35 million for 
Advanced Reactor Regulatory Infrastructure Activities and $20 million 
for International Cooperation and Assistance Activities).--Suggested 
report language: The Committee emphasizes the importance of timely, 
efficient, and effective regulatory activities related to advanced 
nuclear energy to meeting crucial climate and energy security goals. 
The Committee recommends not less than $35,000,000 for Advanced Reactor 
Regulatory Infrastructure Activities.
    Nuclear Supply Chain (FY23 Recommendation--$5 million).--The DOE 
should establish a program that is focused specifically on the nuclear 
supply chain needed to successfully deploy advanced reactors and $5 
million should be initially provided for this purpose. This new nuclear 
supply chain program could be established in the Office of Nuclear 
Energy or within the Office of Manufacturing and Energy Supply Chains.
    Low Enriched Uranium Supply for the Existing Fleet (FY23 
Recommendation--$400 million).--The U.S. reactor fleet currently 
obtains about 20 percent of its enriched uranium from Russia. The U.S. 
nuclear energy industry is committed to ceasing reliance on Russian 
enriched uranium. NEI requests $400 million for FY23 to appropriately 
fund new programs to increase domestic mining, conversion, and LEU 
enrichment capacity and increase diversity of supply.
    DOE Office of Science Isotope R&D and Production Program (FY23 
Recommendation--$102.451 million).--Suggested report language: The 
Committee remains interested in ensuring that a sufficient supply of 
Strontium-90 is available for industrial purposes, utilizing legacy 
materials, and provides $5,000,000 within available funds to carry out 
the findings of the FY-221 Sr-90 plan to prepare capsules for removal 
and transfer for beneficial use.

    [This statement was submitted by Maria Korsnick, President and 
Chief Executive Officer, Nuclear Energy Institute.]
                                 ______
                                 
     Prepared Statement of the Nuclear Waste Strategy Coalition \1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \1\ The NWSC is an ad hoc organization representing the collective 
interests of member state utility regulators, consumer advocates, 
attorneys general, and radiation control officials; Tribal governments; 
local governments; electric utilities with operating and/or shutdown 
nuclear reactors; and other experts on nuclear waste policy matters.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    The NWSC calls upon Congress to appropriate funds in Fiscal Year 
2023 to the Department of Energy (DOE) and Nuclear Regulatory 
Commission (NRC) such that each agency has the sustainable annual 
funding necessary to undertake critical activities related to 
developing, managing, and regulating an integrated program for the 
storage, transportation, and disposal of the Nation's spent nuclear 
fuel (SNF), Greater-Than-Class C (GTCC) waste, and other high-level 
radioactive waste (HLW). For DOE, relevant programs include:
  --Fuel Cycle Research & Development program, which includes relevant 
        subprograms:
    --Integrated Waste Management Systems (DOE request: $53 million); 
            and
    --Used Nuclear Fuel Disposition Research & Development (DOE 
            request: $46.875 million).
  --Nuclear Waste Fund Oversight program (DOE request: $10.205 
        million).
    To conduct activities necessary to develop and manage a multi-
generational, national integrated nuclear waste program and carry out 
the related recommendations herein, DOE needs sustained and 
significantly more funding for expansion of activities under these 
items. As a general matter, direction to DOE and the NRC concerning 
nuclear waste management remains unclear. Despite new Congressional 
appropriations of $27.5 million to DOE in Fiscal Year 2021 and in 
Fiscal Year 2022 for ``expenses necessary for nuclear waste disposal 
activities to carry out the purposes of the Nuclear Waste Policy Act of 
1982, Public Law 97-425, as amended, including interim storage 
activities,'' this funding did not establish the meaningful integrated 
nuclear waste management program that our Nation needs but has lacked 
for more than a decade. Thus, our testimony focuses on the need for 
Congress to:
  --Direct and sufficiently fund the establishment of a national 
        integrated nuclear waste management program that addresses 
        storage, transportation, and disposal;
  --Direct and sufficiently fund the formation of a new, independent 
        waste management organization and the orderly transition of 
        these responsibilities from DOE; and
  --Provide sustainable annual access to the Nuclear Waste Fund (NWF) 
        for a national integrated program, whether managed by DOE or, 
        preferably, a new, independent entity.
          consequences of inaction on nuclear waste management
    The national nuclear waste management program established under the 
1982 Nuclear Waste Policy Act (NWPA) was effectively terminated more 
than a decade ago by executive action. Subsequently, Congress has 
failed to provide meaningful direction or funding for that program or 
any national integrated nuclear waste management program. Since 1983, 
approximately $56 billion has been credited to the NWF, including over 
$21.5 billion collected from electric ratepayers and over $30 billion 
in interest that continues to accumulate (approximately $1.7 billion a 
year). The approximate $44 billion balance sits stranded in U.S. 
Treasury Securities and unappropriated for its intended purpose. These 
facts have resulted in a de facto national policy of inaction that 
negatively impacts:
  --Host States & Communities. The de facto policy indefinitely strands 
        80,000 metric tons of commercial SNF and HLW at operating and 
        decommissioned reactor sites in 34 States without their 
        consent. At shutdown sites, the stranded waste impedes 
        beneficial property reuse.
  --All U.S. Taxpayers. The de facto policy has already cost U.S. 
        taxpayers more than $9 billion, and this liability is growing 
        by approximately $2 million per day.
  --Electric Customers. While no longer paying fees into the NWF per 
        court order, ratepayers in more than 40 States paid billions of 
        dollars that are not being used for their intended purpose.
        nwsc call for action & specific requests/recommendations
    Starting with the subcommittee's markup of the fiscal year 2023 EWD 
bill, Congress should take action to mitigate these real consequences 
of the Federal Government's inaction. To recognize that the Federal 
Government can and should establish a national integrated nuclear waste 
management program, and to set such a program up for success, Congress 
should immediately take the following steps:

      1.   Direct and sufficiently fund the establishment of a national 
        integrated nuclear waste management program that is designed to 
        make progress on permanent disposal in parallel with progress 
        on consolidated interim storage (CIS) and transportation.

             DOE has conducted significant transportation work over the 
            years and has recently re-initiated work on a consent-based 
            siting (CBS) process to facilitate Federal CIS facilities. 
            However, regarding the critical need for permanent 
            disposal, DOE not only has taken Yucca Mountain off the 
            table but also has suggested it cannot take action on 
            permanent disposal until Congress provides new direction 
            and funding. Thus, other than disposal-related R&D, DOE is 
            not making measurable progress on permanent disposal, which 
            frustrates progress on the other two critical parts of an 
            integrated program-CIS and transportation. We are not alone 
            in stressing an integrated approach. In its report, 
            Commercial Spent Nuclear Fuel: Congressional Action Needed 
            to Break Impasse and Develop a Permanent Disposal 
            Solution,\2\ GAO relayed that ``nearly all of the experts 
            we interviewed said the United States needs an integrated 
            waste management strategy'' (p. 30) and recommended that 
            Congress direct DOE accordingly.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \2\ U.S. Government Accountability Office. (2021). Commercial Spent 
Nuclear Fuel: Congressional Action Needed to Break Impasse and Develop 
a Permanent Disposal Solution (GAO-21-603).

             At a minimum, Congress should consider directing and 
            funding constructive, near-term, disposal-related actions 
            by Federal agencies, such as (i) Development of generic 
            repository standards by the Environmental Protection Agency 
            and NRC; and (ii) Expansion of DOE's CBS work to 
            incorporate disposal facilities in addition to CIS 
            facilities. While the NWSC has numerous concerns about the 
            CBS initiative, we want it to be successful, and the lack 
            of progress on permanent disposal is perhaps the biggest 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
            impediment to siting CIS facilities.

             Finally, we continue to request that the subcommittee 
            provide: (i) Funds for NRC and DOE to carry out their 
            respective roles regarding siting and/or licensing of a 
            repository and, simultaneously, private or Federal CIS 
            facilities; (ii) Funds for the continuation and expansion 
            of constructive SNF transportation initiatives (assessment 
            of infrastructure needs at shutdown sites; testing, 
            certification, and procurement of railcars, licensed 
            transportation containers, components; etc.); and (iii) 
            Increased financial and technical assistance to Tribal, 
            State, and local governments for transportation-related 
            emergency preparedness training and activities-both by DOE 
            and by private transportation to non-federal CIS facilities 
            licensed by the NRC.

      2.   Direct and sufficiently fund the formation of a new, 
        independent waste management organization and the orderly 
        transition of these responsibilities from DOE.

             Although the NWSC continues to support the establishment 
            of a dedicated office in DOE that focuses on nuclear waste 
            management, DOE has exhibited no interest in implementing 
            this change.\3\ We believe the Blue Ribbon Commission on 
            America's Nuclear Future (BRC) recommendation for a new, 
            single-purpose organization remains the best solution for 
            governance reform. While the DOE team seems committed to 
            progress, the current structure falls short in comparison 
            to a model that provides additional accountability and 
            reasonably insulates the organization from political 
            interference and excessive turnover in key positions. A new 
            waste management organization could be structured in 
            numerous ways, but we urge consideration of the government-
            owned corporation model (see S.3322, last introduced by the 
            late Senator George Voinovich in 2010) \4\ instead of 
            models that set up government agencies with both 
            politically-appointed leadership and oversight boards that 
            tend to change with every administration and lack the long-
            term continuity needed to make progress on this issue.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \3\ See May 3, 2021 letter from eight organizations to DOE 
Secretary Granholm and Nov. 23, 2021 response letter from DOE Secretary 
Granholm to NWSC Chair Katie Sieben.
    \4\ United States Nuclear Fuel Management Corporation Establishment 
Act of 2010, as introduced by the late Senator George Voinovich 
(S.3322) and Congressman Fred Upton (H.R.5979).

      3.   Provide sustainable annual access to the NWF for a national 
        integrated program, whether managed by DOE or, preferably, a 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
        new, independent entity.

             We call upon the EWD subcommittee to take the lead on 
            reforming the Federal budgetary treatment of the NWF such 
            that sustainable annual access is provided to the funds 
            collected from electric customers-as well as to the 
            annually accumulating interest of approximately $1.7 
            billion-to support the development and management of a 
            multi-generational, national integrated nuclear waste 
            storage, transportation, and disposal program. Recognizing 
            the importance of funding to program success, the BRC, 
            members of Congress,\4\ and several other experts have 
            urged NWF reforms. While appreciating the budgetary 
            complexities involved in implementing these necessary 
            reforms, the NWSC notes that Congress has recently 
            navigated around such complexities to access similar funds 
            (e.g., Land and Water Conservation Fund, Harbor Maintenance 
            Trust Fund) and should find a similar path to ensure that 
            the NWF is used for its intended purpose.
    bills proposing to prohibit use of federal funds for private cis
    The NWSC opposes new measures proposing the outright prohibition on 
use of Federal funds (i.e., the Judgment Fund) for private interim 
storage of SNF until such time that a permanent repository is available 
to accept the SNF. This includes S.3741 as introduced in the Senate and 
its identical companion in the House (H.R.6901).
    The NWSC strongly reiterates the need to make progress on permanent 
disposal in parallel with progress on CIS and transportation and 
appreciates state, Tribal, and community resistance to becoming de 
facto permanent sites given the Federal Government's inaction on 
disposal. That is precisely why we are urging in the strongest terms 
immediate action by Congress and the Administration to reestablish a 
national integrated nuclear waste management program.
    Respectfully, the consequence of the approach advanced in S.3741 
and H.R.6901 is to leave the Nation without any potential near-term 
options to make progress on removing SNF from existing sites and 
reducing the growing financial burden on all U.S. taxpayers. Simply, we 
need Congress and the Administration to refrain from taking options off 
the table and to instead focus on facilitating options and meaningful 
progress on SNF management. The NWSC has repeatedly (and again herein) 
suggested positive, widely endorsed approaches (by the BRC, GAO, 
Members of Congress, et al.) that Congress and the Administration 
should pursue.
    We also highlight concerns about authorizing in appropriations 
bills. From a stakeholder perspective, the appropriations process does 
not lend itself to sufficient notice and debate of provisions that have 
a substantial impact. To be clear, the inclusion of new language that 
would prohibit the use of Federal funds (i.e., the Judgment Fund) for 
private interim storage of SNF until such time that a permanent 
repository is available to accept the SNF substantially impacts NWSC 
members, and if such language must be considered at all, we urge that 
it be vetted in the authorizations committees with subject matter 
jurisdiction.
         concerns with prior senate ewd appropriations language
    The NWSC reiterates concerns with certain Senate-proposed 
provisions (e.g., Section 306 of S. 2470, 116th Cong., 2019). First, 
such language would fail to move forward on CIS and permanent disposal 
in parallel, a key element of a successful integrated nuclear waste 
management program. Second, establishment of specific consent-based 
siting requirements by statute is unnecessary, as potential hosts 
should have the flexibility to negotiate the process and conditions 
that best serve the interests of their jurisdictions. Third, it would 
not address underlying funding concerns while expanding Congressional 
authority to tap the NWF and increase the potential for restarting the 
fee on electric customers. Finally, such language raised consequential 
questions about whether DOE will be allowed to engage Federal or 
private CIS initiatives and whether CIS access may be limited.
     uranium enrichment decontamination & decommissioning (d&d) tax
    The NWSC opposes reinstatement of a uranium enrichment D&D tax. 
Although supportive of environmental cleanup of enrichment sites, U.S. 
nuclear-generating utilities and their customers should not be singled 
out again to pay for D&D of DOE facilities developed for national 
defense.
                                closing
    The NWSC appreciates your leadership and urges you to take action 
this session to ensure meaningful progress toward a national integrated 
nuclear waste management program.

    [This statement was submitted by Katrina McMurrian, Executive 
Director, 
Nuclear Waste Strategy Coalition.]
                                 ______
                                 
       Prepared Statement of the Oregon Water Resources Congress
    The Oregon Water Resources Congress (OWRC) continues to support 
increased funding for the U.S. Department of the Interior's Bureau of 
Reclamation's (Reclamation) Water and Related Resources program and 
requests that a minimum of $2 billion be included in the fiscal year 
2023 Budget, an increase from the $1.7 billion enacted for fiscal year 
2022. Reclamation's highly effective WaterSMART Initiative has been 
woefully underfunded for years and needs significant resources to meet 
the broad and diverse water supply and infrastructure needs in the 17 
western States Reclamation serves. Additional funding will help 
leverage State and local resources, support collaborative partnerships, 
and enhance coordination between other Federal agencies.
    OWRC was established in 1912 as a trade association to support the 
protection of water rights and promote the wise stewardship of water 
resources statewide. OWRC members are local governmental entities, 
which include irrigation districts, water control districts, drainage 
districts, water improvement districts, and other agricultural water 
suppliers that deliver water to roughly one-third of all irrigated land 
in Oregon. These water stewards operate complex water management 
systems, including water supply reservoirs, canals, pipelines, pumps, 
and hydropower facilities. About one-half of our members are in 
Reclamation Projects and most of our members have been awarded grants 
under the WaterSMART program or have contracts with Reclamation.
                    watersmart initiative in oregon
    Reclamation's WaterSMART Initiative and related programs have been 
successfully used in Oregon to implement an array of water 
conservation, water efficiency, and infrastructure modernization 
projects. OWRC strongly supports increased funding for Reclamation's 
WaterSMART Grants and the Water Conservation Field Services Program 
(WCFSP)-the two programs used the most by Oregon's irrigation districts 
to support water conservation activities. These programs are an 
important part of the overall funding package for water resources 
projects collaboratively developed by local communities, supported with 
local and State funding, and designed to meet those communities' unique 
needs while still meeting the goal of water conservation.
    The WCFSP is a key component in supporting irrigation districts and 
similar water delivery systems' water conservation efforts. The WCFSP 
has provided a breadth of technical assistance to irrigation districts 
and provided partial funding for materials used to pipe and line 
canals, water measurement and other technology, and water conservation 
plans-all supporting water conservation efforts being implemented by 
these districts. Providing increased funding for WCFSP projects will 
yield immediate and cost-effective water conservation measures in all 
17 western States served by Reclamation.
    Additionally, we believe the management of the WCFSP should remain 
with the Regional Offices to retain the close connection between 
Reclamation and Project managers and ensure Reclamation's resources are 
used to best support the management of its Projects. The WCFSP is one 
of the Reclamation services most appreciated by our members. The 
regional staff, and particularly the local area office staff, 
understand the unique operating and delivery challenges of the various 
Projects, and therefore provide very meaningful support to the managers 
of those Projects.
                           watersmart grants
    WaterSMART cost-share grants have supported Oregon districts' 
efforts to improve water delivery systems, conserve water, and 
implement innovative projects to meet water needs in Oregon. These 
projects have been a key ingredient in the districts' cooperative 
efforts with other stakeholders in their respective river basins to 
address in-stream, water quality, and water supply needs of their 
basins, without reducing the amount of land to which the districts 
deliver water and avoiding regulatory actions by Federal or State 
agencies. There continues to be more applicants than available funding 
and additional financial resources are needed to enable local water 
suppliers to continue their work to conserve water and help meet the 
Secretary's water conservation goal. With a return of over $5 for every 
$1 of Federal investment, and non-federal match generally exceeding the 
required amount, this program far surpasses the results of other 
partnerships between the Federal Government and local project sponsors. 
The following projects are examples of how the WaterSMART Initiative 
has been recently used in Oregon:
2021 Water and Energy Efficiency Projects:
  --Klamath Irrigation District, Supervisory Control and Data 
        Acquisition and Automation Improvements.--The District, located 
        in southern Oregon, will install twenty-one new Supervisory 
        Control and Data Acquisition components on gates and canals 
        throughout the system that do not currently have automated 
        controls. The project will provide near real-time data on flow 
        rates, water elevations, and control device statuses, and is 
        expected to result in annual water savings of 19,500 acre-feet 
        by reducing spills, over-deliveries, and seepage. Conserved 
        water can be stored in Upper Klamath Lake for a longer period, 
        which may benefit fish species, including the endangered Short 
        nosed Sucker and Coho Salmon, by increasing lake levels and 
        reducing lake temperatures, while also providing a more 
        reliable supply for growers during times of shortage. In 
        addition, conserved water may be available for the fall 
        waterfowl migration at the Lower Klamath National Wildlife 
        Refuge. The project has significant support from stakeholders, 
        including the Klamath Basin National Wildlife Refuge Complex, 
        the Farmers Conservation Alliance, and Ducks Unlimited. 
        Reclamation Funding: $500,000, Total Project Cost: $1,071,774
  --North Unit Irrigation District, Optimized Conveyance Efficiency and 
        Control in Main Canal.--The District, located in central 
        Oregon, will upgrade the automation at nine gated check 
        structures and seven measuring stations along the main canal of 
        its distribution system. The improvements will increase 
        conveyance efficiency and operational control, resulting in an 
        expected annual water savings of 3,337 acre-feet. 
        Overallocation of the Deschutes River and an agreement to adapt 
        dam operations to reduce impact on endangered species has 
        limited District water usage to 60-75 percent of a water user's 
        minimum water right. The district has shut down periodically 
        because of drought and shortage. Water conserved because of the 
        project will be stored within Haystack Reservoir for a more 
        controlled and targeted release during the irrigation season to 
        avoid further reductions during times of drought. Reclamation 
        Funding: $244,871, Total Project Cost: $511,611
2020 Water and Energy Efficiency Projects:
  --Klamath Irrigation District, C-4-a Canal Lining/Piping Project.--
        The District will convert 1.5 miles of the currently open Canal 
        to 3,000 feet of Ethylene Propylene Diene Monomer lining and 
        5,000 feet of high-density polyethylene pipe. The project is 
        expected to result in an annual water savings of 664 acre-feet 
        which is currently lost to seepage, evaporation, and 
        operational spills. The project is expected to improve lake 
        levels to benefit fish species such as the endangered Shortnose 
        Sucker, and to provide a potential late season supply for other 
        water users in times of shortage. In addition, conserved water 
        may be available for the fall waterfowl migration at the Lower 
        Klamath National Wildlife Refuge. Water and Energy Efficiency 
        Grant: $210,650 Total Project Cost: $421,301
  --Middle Fork Irrigation District, Coe Branch Pipeline and Irrigation 
        Efficiency Project.--The District will install a high-density 
        polyethylene pipe from its existing diversion on Coe Creek to 
        an existing settling pond to provide clean irrigation water to 
        its users. When sedimentation worsens in Coe Creek, the 
        District must meet irrigation demand with water from Laurance 
        Reservoir and its tributaries. The district will use the 
        settling pond to remove glacial sediment from the water before 
        it is delivered to irrigators, thereby avoiding diversions from 
        Laurance Lake. By more efficiently and effectively removing 
        sediment, the project will also allow water users to install 
        high-efficiency micro-sprinklers. Water and Energy Efficiency 
        Grant: $266,600 Total Project Cost: $1,460,400
2021 Small-Scale Water Efficiency Projects
  --North Unit Irrigation District, Lateral 41-9 and 58-3-2 Piping 
        Project.--The District, in central Oregon, will convert two 
        open canals with 4,450 linear feet of buried high-density 
        polyethylene pipe. This project will reduce water lost to 
        seepage, improve conveyance efficiency, and reduce problematic 
        sediment transport. This project is prioritized through several 
        planning efforts, including the District's System Improvement 
        Plan. Reclamation Funding: $74,691, Total Project Cost: 
        $149,383
  --Talent Irrigation District, East Main Canal Chamberland Shotcrete 
        Project.--The District, in southern Oregon, will line two 
        unlined sections of the East Main Canal totaling 320 linear 
        feet, with reinforced shotcrete liner. The upgrade will 
        increase the efficiency and reliability of water deliveries. 
        The project supports the District's Water Management and 
        Conservation Plan of 2018. Reclamation Funding: $16,220, Total 
        Project Cost: $32,441
  --West Extension Irrigation District, Irrigation Main Water Meter 
        Project, Boardman East.--The District, in northeast Oregon, 
        will install nine magnetic meters at the head of six piped 
        laterals. The project will allow the District to see at a 
        glance how much water is being delivered down each lateral. 
        This project will help the District better manage their water 
        supply, resulting in improved water supply consistency and 
        resilience to drought. The metering of these laterals is 
        identified in the 2016 update of the District's Boardman Master 
        Plan. Reclamation Funding: $32,500, Total Project Cost: $65,000
    Further innovative projects like the ones above could be developed 
and implemented in Oregon if more funding is made available through the 
WaterSMART Initiative. Additionally, OWRC would like to see the funding 
cap increased from $1 million to $5 million in areas where there are 
known endangered, threatened, or vulnerable species. By increasing the 
funding cap, Reclamation would have the ability to fund projects aimed 
at improving species habitat at a higher level, allowing for these 
important projects to move forward.
    We respectfully request the appropriation of at least $2 billion 
for Reclamation's Water and Related Resources program for fiscal year 
2023. Providing increased funding for the WaterSMART Initiative is a 
wise investment that will leverage resources, increase strategic 
partnerships, and yield immediate and long-term benefits for our 
Nation's economy, environment, and communities. Thank you for the 
opportunity to provide testimony regarding the fiscal year 2023 budget 
for the U.S Bureau of Reclamation.
    Sincerely.

    [This statement was submitted by April Snell, Executive Director, 
Oregon Water Resources Congress.]
                                 ______
                                 
     Prepared Statement of the Society for Industrial and Applied 
                              Mathematics
                                summary
    This written testimony is submitted on behalf of the Society for 
Industrial and Applied Mathematics (SIAM) to ask you to continue your 
support of the Department of Energy (DOE) Office of Science with 
funding of $8.8 billion in fiscal year (FY) 2023. In particular, we 
urge you to provide $378 million for Mathematical, Computational, and 
Computer Sciences Research in the Advanced Scientific Computing 
Research (ASCR) program within the Office of Science. We also emphasize 
the importance of support for graduate students through the 
Computational Sciences Graduate Fellowship and request that $21 million 
be provided in FY 2023.
                           written testimony
    On behalf of SIAM, we submit this written testimony for the record 
to the subcommittee on Energy and Water Development Appropriations of 
the United States Senate.
    SIAM has approximately 14,000 members, including applied and 
computational mathematicians, computer scientists, numerical analysts, 
engineers, statisticians, and mathematics educators. They work in 
industrial and service organizations, universities, colleges, and 
government agencies and laboratories all over the world. In addition, 
SIAM has over 500 institutional members-colleges, universities, 
corporations, and research organizations. SIAM members come from many 
different disciplines but have a common interest in applying 
mathematics in partnership with computational science towards solving 
real-world problems.
    SIAM appreciates your Committee's leadership on and recognition of 
the critical role of the Department of Energy (DOE) Office of Science 
and its support for mathematics, science, and engineering in enabling a 
strong U.S. economy, workforce, and society. DOE was one of the first 
Federal agencies to champion computational science as one of the three 
pillars of science, along with theory and experiment, and SIAM deeply 
appreciates and values DOE activities.
    SIAM is grateful for the strong funding that the Office of Science 
received in FY 2022, and we join with the research community to request 
that you continue this momentum by providing the Office of Science with 
$8.8 billion for fiscal year 2023. The requested amount is necessary 
for ensuring continued support for areas such as mathematics and 
scientific research to help address national priorities, foster 
economic growth, and create jobs.
    Advanced Scientific Computing Research.--Activities within the 
Advanced Scientific Computing Research (ASCR) program play a key role 
in supporting research that begins to fulfill the needs described 
above. Within the overall amount for ASCR, we urge you to provide $378 
million for Mathematical, Computational, and Computer Sciences Research 
in FY 2023, consistent with the President's FY 2023 budget request. 
This level of funding is needed to ensure the long-term health and 
viability of the high-performance computing (HPC) ecosystem that DOE 
relies on for conducting groundbreaking discovery science while 
supporting increased investment in priority areas such as quantum 
computing and artificial intelligence.
    Core research activities within ASCR enable the development of 
critical tools for computational science, modeling, and data analysis 
that enhance advanced computing capabilities and seed new areas of 
research with potential for revolutionary advancements. Sustained 
investment in basic research ultimately enabled the global leadership 
in HPC that the U.S. currently enjoys. While our strength in HPC is 
exemplified by the groundbreaking exascale systems currently being 
assembled, this position is increasingly being challenged by overseas 
competitors.
    We strongly support the Administrations plan's to reorientate ASCR 
toward longer term research as the Exascale Computing Initiative comes 
to fruition and funding for the associated Exascale Computing Project 
continues its planned decline. This shift is underpinned by strategic 
visioning exercises that have produced several recommendations for 
reinvigorating ASCR's research agenda. These include a substantial 
reinvestment in foundational science and increased support for high-
risk/high-reward research activities, especially at universities.\1\ 
Such an approach will help maintain the long-term viability and 
vibrancy of the broader HPC research community as ASCR looks toward the 
post-exascale future.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \1\ Advanced Scientific Computing Advisory Committee (ASCAC), 
subcommittee on Exascale Transition, ``Transition Report'', https://
science.osti.gov/-/media/ascr/ascac/pdf/meetings/202004/
Transition_Report_202004-
ASCAC.pdf?la=en&hash=5164916FE5158EE8919C26804B4CF7F6
DDA36E9D.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    In addition to the critical role that it already plays in priority 
areas like artificial intelligence and quantum information science, 
ASCR's research portfolio will be a critical asset to the Department's 
efforts to drive innovation in climate and Earth systems predictability 
and renewable energy. Specifically, research in applied mathematics and 
computational science will enable new capabilities in environmental 
sensing and edge computing with applications in Earth systems 
prediction and climate forecasting. In addition, advancements in 
modeling, simulation, and optimization can help improve grid 
reliability and the integration of renewable energy sources into the 
broader power distribution system.
    Supporting the Pipeline of Mathematicians and Scientists.--SIAM is 
grateful for Congress's strong support of the Computational Sciences 
Graduate Fellowships (CSGF) in FY 2022, providing a $5 million increase 
after it had been flat funded since FY 2015, but requests that $21 
million be provided for the Computational Science Graduate Fellowship 
(CSGF) in FY 2023 within the overall amount for research. Researchers 
trained in computational science and working in universities, national 
laboratories, and industry are essential to propel advances in many DOE 
critical research areas. This program helps ensure the existence of an 
adequate supply of scientists and engineers with strong computational 
research experience and close ongoing ties to DOE to meet future 
national workforce needs.
    The increase we are requesting to CSGF reflects the growing need 
for an expanded workforce in emerging areas of importance to DOE such 
as artificial intelligence and data science. As international 
competition in science and engineering intensifies, maintaining U.S. 
leadership in these areas will increasingly depend on our ability to 
cultivate a scientific workforce with strong research experience and 
close ties to DOE. An increase in funding to CSGF would also enable 
ASCR to address a consistent oversubscription in the program and 
advance diversity, equity, and inclusion through expanded outreach to 
minority serving institutions.
    In addition to CSGF, this level of funding for the research program 
would support increases for the Reaching a New Energy Sciences 
Workforce (RENEW) initiative, started in FY 2022, and support the new 
Accelerate and FAIR initiatives, which would further broaden and 
diversify the applied mathematics and computer science research 
communities by increasing opportunities for students and institutions 
that are currently underrepresented.
    The Role of Mathematics in Meeting Health, Energy, and Security 
Challenges.--Support for applied mathematics and computational science 
is critical to sustaining the Nation's global scientific and 
technological leadership, energy production capabilities, and national 
security. By exploiting DOE's world class supercomputing capabilities, 
mathematicians and computational scientists supported by the 
abovementioned programs pioneer new modeling and simulation techniques 
that enable substantial breakthroughs in materials synthesis, energy 
distribution, and human physiology among other complex areas where 
laboratory experiments or field observations are too costly, time 
consuming, or simply insufficient. This was demonstrated recently in 
the midst of the novel coronavirus pandemic. Researchers at Oak Ridge 
National Laboratory (ORNL) developed a computational model of the novel 
coronavirus. They then ran the model on ORNL's supercomputer, Summit, 
and were able to identify 77 molecular compounds that could serve as 
the basis for therapeutic drugs to counter COVID-19.\2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \2\ https://chemrxiv.org/articles/
Repurposing_Therapeutics_for_the_Wuhan_Coronavirus_
nCov-2019_Supercomputer-Based_Docking_to_the_Viral_S--
Protein_and_Human_
ACE2_Interface/11871402/3.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
                               conclusion
    The programs in the Office of Science, particularly those discussed 
above, are important elements of DOE's efforts to fulfill its mission. 
They contribute to the goals of dramatically transforming our current 
capabilities to develop new sources of energy and improve energy 
efficiency to ensure energy independence and facilitate DOE's effort to 
increase U.S. competitiveness by training and attracting the best 
scientific talent into DOE headquarters and laboratories, the American 
research enterprise, and the clean energy economy.
    Thank you again for your ongoing support of the DOE Office of 
Science. The DOE Office of Science needs sustained annual funding to 
maintain our competitive edge in science and technology, and therefore 
we respectfully ask that you continue your support of these critical 
programs. We appreciate the opportunity to provide testimony to the 
Committee on behalf of SIAM and look forward to providing any 
additional information or assistance you may ask of us during the FY 
2023 appropriations process.

    [This statement was submitted by Dr. Susanne C. Brenner, President; 
Dr. Anne Gelb, Vice President for Science Policy; and Dr. Suzanne L. 
Weekes, 
Executive Director, Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics.]
                                 ______
                                 
    Prepared Statement of Stanford Synchrotron Radiation Lightsource
    Dear Chair Feinstein and Ranking Member Kennedy,
    As a faculty member at Iowa State University, I appreciate the 
strong support you have provided for the Energy and Water Development 
Appropriations Bills since they have funded the large-scale X-ray light 
sources that are operated by the Department of Energy's Office of 
Science, Basic Energy Sciences (DOE-BES). These facilities, such as the 
Stanford Synchrotron Radiation Lightsource (SSRL) in Menlo Park 
California use electricity to create beams of X-ray light that are many 
millions of times brighter than the sun. They are essential for the US 
to remain internationally competitive on the world research stage, and 
represent a pinnacle of technological achievement. Examples of their 
use include the development of advanced materials that will form the 
basis of transformative technologies, allowing our society to do more 
with less, such as ultra-high density digital storage media or new 
energy storage, and are vital for a low-carbon future. During the 
recent Covid-19 pandemic the X-ray light sources delivered scientific 
data that was pivotal in the development of new drugs and treatments; 
more than 90 percent of drug discovery over the last decade has 
resulted from work performed at X-ray light sources. In other research 
areas, unique insights from X-ray light have allowed safe and effective 
cleanup of legacy environmental contamination of nuclear materials, and 
have proved pivotal in understanding the optimum ways to maintain the 
Nation's nuclear stockpile. My research group relies on large-scale X-
ray light sources for developing new materials for water treatment.
    I have seen firsthand how DOE BES User Facilities enable 
discoveries that drive the Nation's economy, strengthen national 
security, and improve quality of life. Therefore, as the budget for DOE 
in fiscal year 2023 is developed, I urge you to work to increase the 
fiscal year 2023 DOE science budget, in particular for scientific user 
facilities that serve a large number of science and technology areas 
and researchers in the US.
    Despite challenging budgetary times, it remains clear that US 
interests gain real benefits from innovations enabled by the Federal 
investment in major science facilities, and in particular SSRL. We 
therefore urge you to work to increase funding for SSRL and the other 
DOE BES laboratories, as this is a strong investment to strengthen the 
scientific and engineering workforce and build the US economy.
    Sincerely.

    [This statement was submitted by Joe Charbonnet, PhD, Assistant 
Professor, Iowa State University.]

                                 ______
                                 
    Prepared Statement of the United Barrier Technologies, Inc. \1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \1\ United Barrier Technologies is focused on developing new 
innovative flood control solutions that will transform the Flood 
Control Industry.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    Chairwoman Feinstein, Ranking Member Kennedy, and Members of the 
Energy and Water subcommittee on Appropriations, thank you for the 
opportunity to submit the following testimony in support of funding an 
additional $4 million for U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Engineer 
Research and Development Center (ERDC), Coastal & Hydraulics Laboratory 
for test and evaluation of new innovative flood control barriers. 
Current flood control solutions, levees and floodwalls, are outdated, 
unreliable and expensive, and are unable to protect our Nation from 
increasing flooding due to climate change. Congress should allocate 
greater resources for new innovative flood control barriers.
    The Socioeconomic Impacts of Flooding. Flooding is the most 
pervasive natural disaster in the United States. For example, Hurricane 
Harvey caused $125 billion in damages. Harvey's hurricane flooding 
forced 39,000 people out of their homes, destroyed one million motor 
vehicles and forced 200,000 homes to lose power.\2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \2\ How Much Damage Did Hurricane Harvey Cause? https://
www.hurricaneharveyfirm.com/blog/2020/january/how-much-damage-did-
hurricane-harvey-cause-/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    In spring 2019, the Midwest experienced severe flooding causing 
over $20 billion in damages to public and private property and losses 
to crops and livestock. Over 80 levee systems within the Army Corps 
levee portfolio were overtopped or breached. Over 700 miles of levees 
were damaged.\3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \3\ Infrastructure Report Card: Levees https://
infrastructurereportcard.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/01/Levees-
2021.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    Climate change and the concentrating of population and economic 
activity in flood-prone areas are increasing flood risk. This has 
implications for prosperity and economic security as well as societal 
wellbeing because flooding, typically, affects the poorest and most 
marginalized populations more deeply. It is incumbent on the Federal 
Government to test and evaluate new modern flood control barriers with 
vastly improved resilience to flood risk.
    Deficiencies of Levees and Floodwalls. Sumerians pioneered using 
earthen levees to protect against major flooding in southern 
Mesopotamia from around 3500 B.C. Today, the United States continues to 
rely on these ancient, pre-industrial, flood control solutions. There 
are over 100,000 miles of levees and floodwalls throughout the United 
States. These legacy flood control solutions have significant flaws 
including:
      (1)   Permanent Structures that Block Public View and Water 
        Access. These permanent structures are huge, elongated, 
        monolithic, structures that block the public's view and access 
        to water. These restrictions negatively impact property values, 
        tourism, business, the community's aesthetic appeal and the 
        public's enjoyment of the seas. For these reasons, any 
        proposals for the construction of these legacy solutions are 
        often met with considerable public resistance and litigation.
      (2)   Permanent Structures that Fail. Levees and floodwalls have 
        unacceptably high failure rates. Dirt is an essential element 
        that makes up levees. However, the presence of water causes 
        dirt to become unstable. As a result, as water levels rise, so 
        do the risks of levee structural failures. Research shows that 
        levees start to fail at 50 percent of their protective 
        height.\4\ Home owners living near levees have a 25 percent+ 
        chance of having their homes destroyed by flood waters caused 
        by failed levees.\5\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \4\ Obtaining Fragility Curves on Levees Subjected to Flooding. 
https://www.ecsmge-2019.com/uploads/2/1/7/9/21790806/0622-ecsmge-
2019_lopez-acosta.pdf.
    \5\ Levees in the USACE Galveston District. https://
www.swg.usace.army.mil/Portals/26/docs/PAO/Levee.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
      (3)   Permanent Structures that Have Negative Impacts on the 
        Environment. They:
           -- Interfere with the natural development of plant life 
            (flora).
           -- Interfere with the natural development of animal life 
            (fauna).
      (4)   Expensive to Build. The average cost for levees and 
        floodwalls is $57 million per linear mile. These costs include 
        planning, materials, equipment, labor and cost creep due to 
        long construction times.
    Requirements for the Next Generation Flood Control Barriers. The 
general public wants mobile flood control barriers that allow views of 
the water and access to the water, barriers that will not fail, 
barriers with minimal impacts to the environment and barriers that can 
be deployed at a reasonable cost. It is imperative that ERDC 
investigate new innovative flood control solutions with the following 
characteristics:
      (1)   New Flood Control Barriers Should be Mobile. Mobile, 
        railcar-based barriers can be rolled into position only during 
        flood emergency periods, and kept out of site in storage yards 
        when not needed. In short, the barrier should be visible to the 
        public when necessary and out of view when not. This will allow 
        the public to maintain views of the water and access to the 
        water. Communities will also maintain their aesthetic appeal 
        and property values.
      (2)   The Flood Control Barriers Should be Made of Very Heavy 
        Steel. Heavy steel barriers are highly reliable and cannot be 
        breached by water. Their weight can be supplemented with 
        ballast flood water taken from the flood location. 
        Transitioning to steel barriers will also invigorate the steel 
        and railcar industries in the United States.
      (3)   Minimal Environmental Impact and Climate Change Adaptable. 
        The railroad tracks have a small footprint and minimal impact 
        on flora and fauna. The mobile barriers can adapt to climate 
        change by swapping out shorter railcars with new taller ones.
      (4)   Provide Flood Protection for Marginalized Communities. A 
        mobile flood control barrier can be deployed cost-effectively 
        to low-income communities. The only infrastructure needed is 
        railroad track. Railroad track can also provide much-needed 
        transportation options, including: trolleys, bike paths and 
        walkways.
      (5)   Lower Cost. The average cost for mobile flood control 
        barrier systems should be approximately $30 million per linear 
        mile. These costs include railcars, installation of the 
        railroad tracks, storage, labor, system management and other 
        costs. In addition, the system's mobility provides for shared 
        use of the railcars with other locations, which will 
        dramatically lower the $30 million system cost.
    Need for Engineer Research and Development Center (ERDC) Funding. 
ERDC is the premier research and development center for the Army Corps 
of Engineers to conduct test and evaluation of new innovative solutions 
to mitigate the risks of flooding. This new research project will 
better protect properties and infrastructure and reduce the impacts of 
flooding on peoples' lives and livelihoods. Investments in this 
technology will spur economic development, create jobs and protect the 
environment and public health.
    Report Language.
    We recommend the following report language:

       The Committee provides not less than $4,000,000 for U.S. Army 
            Corps of Engineers, Engineer Research and Development 
            Center (ERDC) to conduct prototyping and test and 
            evaluation of innovative mobile flood control barrier 
            systems. The Committee supports efforts to develop the next 
            generation of flood control barriers to improve cost, 
            performance, and overcome the deficiencies of permanent, 
            fixed barriers.

    We thank the Committee for your consideration of this testimony.

    [This statement was submitted by Phillip M. DeLaine, Jr., 
President, United 
Barrier Technologies, Inc.]
                                 ______
                                 
            Prepared Statement of the WateReuse Association
    Thank you for providing the opportunity to submit written testimony 
on Fiscal Year 2023 appropriations. I write today on behalf of the 
WateReuse Association and its members to highlight the importance of 
the U.S. Bureau of Reclamation's (USBR) Title XVI-WIIN Water 
Reclamation and Reuse Competitive Grants Program and the Desalination 
and Water Purification Program. The Title XVI-WIIN Program and 
Desalination and Water Purification Program have helped communities 
across the West build drought resilience, keep nutrients and other 
pollutants out of sensitive waterways, save billions of dollars 
relative to importing water, and grow sustainable economies. They are 
key economic and climate resiliency tools.
    Given the critical role that water recycling plays in water 
resources management and the overwhelming demand for projects as 
authorized in section 4009(c) of Public Law 114-322, we urge you to 
include $20 million for Title XVI-WIIN in Energy and Water Development 
appropriations legislation for fiscal year 2023. Along with direct 
appropriations provided by the Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act 
of 2021, this funding will help USBR meet the overwhelming demand for 
Title XVI-WIIN program dollars. In addition to our request for Title 
XVI-WIIN, we support a funding level that meets demand for USBR's 
Desalination and Water Purification Program in fiscal year 2023. The 
Desalination Program invests in projects in Reclamation States that 
involve ocean or brackish water desalination. In the arid West, 
desalination is an important tool that can help communities increase 
their water supply.
    The WateReuse Association is a not-for-profit trade association for 
water utilities, businesses, industrial and commercial enterprises, 
non-profit organizations, and research entities that engage in and on 
water recycling. WateReuse and its state and regional sections 
represent more than 200 water utilities serving over 60 million 
customers, and over 300 businesses and organizations across the 
country. Our mission is to engage our members in a movement for safe 
and sustainable water supplies, to promote acceptance and support of 
recycled water, and to advocate for policies and funding that increase 
water reuse.
    Since Title XVI's inception in 1992, Congress has authorized 53 
Title XVI recycling projects producing more than 400,000 acre-feet of 
drought-resistant water supply. To date, USBR has obligated over $700 
million in Federal funding, which has been leveraged with non-federal 
funding to implement more than $3.3 billion in water reuse 
improvements--a nearly 5:1 leverage ratio. Due to the popularity of 
Title XVI-WIIN, the program has a large backlog exceeding $700 million 
in Federal cost share for eligible projects, and demand is expected to 
grow as more projects become eligible. While the IIJA will help USBR 
meet some of this demand, additional discretionary appropriations are 
and will continue to be needed.
    Water projects funded through the Title XVI program have been used 
to increase the supply of fresh drinking water, generate sustainable 
irrigation water for landscaping and agricultural use, restore 
sensitive ecosystems, and help industries expand and create jobs, among 
other purposes. The program is not limited to the reuse of municipal 
wastewater--it also helps communities identify beneficial uses for 
industrial, agricultural, and domestic wastewater, as well as impaired 
ground and surface water. Investments through the Title XVI competitive 
grants program have helped both urban and rural communities across the 
West build a strong and secure economic future.
    A recent GAO report (GAO-19-110) highlighted a number of 
illustrative Title XVI projects. For example, program investments 
helped one drought-stricken water district in California develop 
infrastructure to use more than 2 billion gallons of recycled water to 
irrigate sports fields, golf courses, parks, school grounds, and 
medians. Another project is providing drought-resistant recycled water 
to farmers to irrigate 45,000 acres of farmland, reducing demand on the 
area's over-drafted groundwater basin. Other Title XVI projects have 
been used to prevent saltwater intrusion into aquifers, restore 
marshes, wetlands, and other habitat, and create potable drinking 
water.
    Thank you for considering our requests and please do not hesitate 
to reach out if you have any questions.
    Sincerely.

    [This statement was submitted by Greg Fogel, Director of Government 
Affairs and Policy, WateReuse Association.]
                                 ______
                                 
         Prepared Statement of the Winnebago Tribe of Nebraska
    Chairwoman Feinstein, Ranking Member Kennedy and Members of the 
Committee, thank you for taking public testimony on appropriations for 
the United States Army Corps of Engineers for Fiscal Year 2023.
                      winnebago lands legislation
    My name is Victoria Kitcheyan, and I am the Chairwoman of the 
Winnebago Tribe of Nebraska. I am here to tell our story of forced 
removals by the United States Army, our reservation that was 
established by treaty along the banks of the Missouri River and the 
wrongful condemnation of our lands by the United States Army Corps of 
Engineers.
    Today, the Winnebagos make our home on a reservation along the 
hills and banks of the Missouri River in Northeastern Nebraska and 
Northwestern Iowa. We have over 5,000 Tribal members and Tribal 
enterprises that employ thousands of employees in Nebraska and Iowa and 
around the world.
    The Winnebago people are originally from present-day Wisconsin. In 
the mid-1800s, our people were forcibly removed by the United States 
Army from Wisconsin to Minnesota, Iowa, South Dakota, and finally in 
1865 to the Winnebago Indian Reservation in Nebraska and Iowa. Our 
treaty promised that land was ``set apart for the occupation and future 
home of the Winnebago Indians, forever....'' I will say that again--
Forever.
    Unfortunately, the United States did not live up to this promise. 
After enduring a history of removals, our land, reserved by treaty, was 
still taken from us as recently as 1970--52 years ago. At that time, 
the U.S. Army Corps began condemning lands along the Missouri River 
including our lands reserved by treaty which was then broken.
    In 1970, the Army Corps improperly and illegally condemned almost 
2,000 acres of land of our reservation in Iowa and Nebraska. The Corps 
filed two condemnation proceedings against the Tribe, one in Iowa and 
one in Nebraska. Usually, the U.S. would be required to defend the 
Tribe as part of its trust responsibility for our land, however, 
because the Army Corps itself is a Federal entity, the U.S. could not 
defend our interests. The Tribe had to defend its own interests in 
multiple lawsuits, in multiple States, in multiple courts, on extremely 
short notice and with limited resources. One of our councilmen at the 
time, Louis ``Louie'' Larose, tells an account that the Tribe only had 
one day get a lawyer to defend its lands.
    The Tribe lost in both courts. When the Tribe appealed to the 
Federal Court of Appeals, the Tribe prevailed in its lawsuit in 
Nebraska. The Appeals Court found that the Army Corps did not have 
Congressional authorization to condemn our Reservation lands.
    The Tribe also appealed the Iowa case to the Federal Court of 
Appeals. After years of litigation and appeals, the Eighth Circuit 
Court of Appeals found that the condemnation was illegal but the Court 
did not have the authority to order the Army Corps to return the land 
to the Tribe because of res judicata, the matter was already decided.
    To this day, the Tribe has been fighting for the return of our 
land. The Tribe exhausted its remedies in the court system. After 
decades of seeking redress from the U.S. Army Corps and United States 
Department of the Interior (``Interior''), the Tribe was told to go to 
Congress. So we did. Legislation was introduced in the U.S. House of 
Representatives in the 115th and the 116th Congresses but did not pass.
    Last year, the Winnebago Land Transfer Act was introduced to right 
this wrong and restore our homelands. We thank the legislation's bi-
partisan sponsor and original co-sponsors, Representative Sharice 
Davids, a member of our sister Tribe, the Ho-Chunk Nation, 
Representative Darren Soto, and Representative Randy Feenstra, our 
congressman on the Iowa side of our reservation where these lands are 
located, and co-sponsor Representative Cindy Axne.
    The bill would transfer the Tribe's former reservation lands from 
the Army Corps back to Interior. The land in this bill is mostly 
woodland and marsh along the Iowa side of the Missouri River and a 
recreational, hunting and fishing area. Once restored to us, the 
Winnebago Wildlife and Parks Department would be responsible for this 
land just like all of our land. The Department oversees hunting and 
fishing on 10,000 acres of woodland on the Nebraska side of the 
Missouri River. Hunters come from all over the country to hunt at 
Winnebago. The Department has the experience and resources to regulate 
recreational and conservation activities and ensure Winnebago laws and 
regulations are enforced. The Department's website provides information 
on fees and regulations and offers an online process to obtain hunting 
and fishing licenses. The Tribe would not make much change to the 
conservation measures in place now by the U.S. Army Corps and the State 
of Iowa Department of Natural Resources.
    On October 5, 2021, the subcommittee for Indigenous Peoples of the 
United States held a legislative hearing for the first time on the 
bill. We are grateful that Interior supports our legislation. Secretary 
Deb Haaland, the first Native American Secretary, has made restoration 
of Tribal homelands one of her top priorities.
    Upon passage of our legislation, we hope that the U.S. Army Corps 
of Engineers makes the timely and efficient transfer of the land back 
to us a priority. Only then would the United States right this wrong 
and ensure that our Tribe's homelands are protected, respected and 
preserved.
    For 50 years, the Winnebago People have waited for their land to be 
returned. Councilman Larose has served on the Winnebago Tribal Council 
intermittently for the past 50 years. He was the Tribe's Chairman in 
the early 1970s when the land at Snyder's Bend was illegally condemned 
by the United States Army Corps of Engineers. He bore witness to the 
proceedings where our lands were lost. He sits on the Council today and 
has fought hard for the return of these lands. During his service to 
the Tribe, he has not given up on getting our land back and we have 
never been closer to the moment when our land will finally be returned 
to the Tribe.
    Homelands are the lifeblood of American Indians, Alaska Natives and 
Native Hawaiians. Our legislation is a prime example and an opportunity 
for a wrong to be made right. Congress must do everything it can to 
protect all Tribal homelands.
    Congressional relief is our last hope. This bill has now been 
introduced in Congress three times. We hope the third time is a charm. 
It is time for Congress to act and pass this bill to restore the 
promises our country made to us in a treaty, the supreme law of the 
land.
                    carlisle indian boarding school
    The Boarding School Era is a stain on American history born under 
genocidal Federal policy against Tribes. We appreciate Interior's 
leadership and Secretary Haaland's willingness to bring this dark 
history into the light through the Federal Indian Boarding School 
Initiative. All Tribes have been impacted by boarding schools in their 
own way. Implementation of the Initiative in a meaningful way will be 
costly, lengthy, labor-intensive, and complex. We ask that Congress 
steadfastly supports this Initiative.
    The Tribe is working with the U.S. Army Corps at the War College in 
Carlisle, Pennsylvania, the site of one of the original Indian boarding 
schools. We are seeking repatriation of our precious children's remains 
that are buried in its cemetery. We seek the United States' respect and 
cooperation to bring them home where they belong. To date, although our 
discussions with the Army Corps have been fruitful and the Army Corps 
has been cooperative, their cooperation is ultimately voluntary and 
could stop at any time. Congress must support this delicate and sacred 
process and these efforts. We will not give up until we see justice and 
our children are home.

    [This statement was submitted by Victoria Kitcheyan, Chairwoman, 
Winnebago Tribe of Nebraska.]
                                 ______
                                 

