
 - NOMINATIONS OF MARIA LOUISE LAGO AND LISA W. WANG

[Senate Hearing 117-729]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]






                                                        S. Hrg. 117-729
 
                   NOMINATIONS OF MARIA LOUISE LAGO 
                            AND LISA W. WANG

=======================================================================

                                HEARING

                               before the

                          COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
                          UNITED STATES SENATE

                    ONE HUNDRED SEVENTEENTH CONGRESS

                             FIRST SESSION

                                 on the

                             NOMINATIONS OF

   MARIA LOUISE LAGO, TO BE UNDER SECRETARY FOR INTERNATIONAL TRADE, 
DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE; AND LISA W. WANG, TO BE ASSISTANT SECRETARY FOR 
    ENFORCEMENT AND COMPLIANCE, INTERNATIONAL TRADE ADMINISTRATION, 
                         DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE

                               __________

                           NOVEMBER 16, 2021
                           __________

                           
                           
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT] 

                               
                                     
                                     

            Printed for the use of the Committee on Finance
            
            
                       ______

             U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE 
 53-207-PDF          WASHINGTON : 2023
 
 
          
            
            
            
            


                          COMMITTEE ON FINANCE

                      RON WYDEN, Oregon, Chairman

DEBBIE STABENOW, Michigan            MIKE CRAPO, Idaho
MARIA CANTWELL, Washington           CHUCK GRASSLEY, Iowa
ROBERT MENENDEZ, New Jersey          JOHN CORNYN, Texas
THOMAS R. CARPER, Delaware           JOHN THUNE, South Dakota
BENJAMIN L. CARDIN, Maryland         RICHARD BURR, North Carolina
SHERROD BROWN, Ohio                  ROB PORTMAN, Ohio
MICHAEL F. BENNET, Colorado          PATRICK J. TOOMEY, Pennsylvania
ROBERT P. CASEY, Jr., Pennsylvania   TIM SCOTT, South Carolina
MARK R. WARNER, Virginia             BILL CASSIDY, Louisiana
SHELDON WHITEHOUSE, Rhode Island     JAMES LANKFORD, Oklahoma
MAGGIE HASSAN, New Hampshire         STEVE DAINES, Montana
CATHERINE CORTEZ MASTO, Nevada       TODD YOUNG, Indiana
ELIZABETH WARREN, Massachusetts      BEN SASSE, Nebraska
                                     JOHN BARRASSO, Wyoming

                    Joshua Sheinkman, Staff Director

                Gregg Richard, Republican Staff Director

                                  (II)


                            C O N T E N T S

                              ----------                              

                           OPENING STATEMENTS

                                                                   Page
Wyden, Hon. Ron, a U.S. Senator from Oregon, chairman, Committee 
  on Finance.....................................................     1
Crapo, Hon. Mike, a U.S. Senator from Idaho......................     2

                        ADMINISTRATION NOMINEES

Lago, Hon. Maria Louise, nominated to be Under Secretary for 
  International Trade, Department of Commerce, Washington, DC....     3
Wang, Lisa W., nominated to be Assistant Secretary for 
  Enforcement and Compliance, International Trade Administration, 
  Department of Commerce, Washington, DC.........................     5

               ALPHABETICAL LISTING AND APPENDIX MATERIAL

Crapo, Hon. Mike:
    Opening statement............................................     2
    Prepared statement...........................................    25
Lago, Hon. Maria Louise:
    Testimony....................................................     3
    Prepared statement...........................................    25
    Biographical information.....................................    26
    Responses to questions from committee members................    36
Wang, Lisa W.:
    Testimony....................................................     5
    Prepared statement...........................................    39
    Biographical information.....................................    40
    Responses to questions from committee members................    45
Wyden, Hon. Ron:
    Opening statement............................................     1
    Prepared statement...........................................    47

                                 (III)


                   NOMINATIONS OF MARIA LOUISE LAGO,



                       TO BE UNDER SECRETARY FOR



                    INTERNATIONAL TRADE, DEPARTMENT



                     OF COMMERCE; AND LISA W. WANG,



                     TO BE ASSISTANT SECRETARY FOR



                      ENFORCEMENT AND COMPLIANCE,



                  INTERNATIONAL TRADE ADMINISTRATION,



                         DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE

                              ----------                              


                       TUESDAY, NOVEMBER 16, 2021

                                       U.S. Senate,
                                      Committee on Finance,
                                                    Washington, DC.
    The hearing was convened, pursuant to notice, at 10:31 
a.m., via Webex, in Room SD-215, Dirksen Senate Office 
Building, Hon. Ron Wyden (chairman of the committee) presiding.
    Present: Senators Menendez, Carper, Cardin, Brown, Bennet, 
Whitehouse, Cortez Masto, Crapo, Cassidy, Lankford, and Young.
    Also present: Democratic staff: Sally Laing, International 
Trade Counsel; Ian Nicholson, Investigator and Nominations 
Advisor; and Joshua Sheinkman, Staff Director. Republican 
staff: Lincoln Foran, Policy Advisor; James Guiliano, Policy 
Advisor; John O'Hara, Trade Policy Director and Counsel; Mayur 
Patel, Chief International Trade Counsel; Gregg Richard, Staff 
Director; and Jeffrey Wrase, Deputy Staff Director and Chief 
Economist.

   OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. RON WYDEN, A U.S. SENATOR FROM 
             OREGON, CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON FINANCE

    The Chairman. The Finance Committee meets this morning to 
discuss two important nominations for President Biden's trade 
policy team at the Commerce Department. First, Maria Lago is 
nominated to serve as Under Secretary of Commerce for 
International Trade. This role is all about being the point 
person for trade policy at the Commerce Department, heading up 
the International Trade Administration. It deals with enforcing 
our trade laws to protect American jobs, breaking down barriers 
to American-made exports, and getting small and medium-sized 
businesses into the trade policy winners circle. It is a wide-
ranging job, but that is why President Biden nominated an 
individual with a vast array of experience in many different 
leadership roles.
    Ms. Lago served during the Obama administration as 
Assistant Secretary for International Markets and Development 
at the Treasury. She previously led the Office of International 
Affairs for the Securities and Exchange Commission. She was a 
top economic development official for New York State and the 
city of Boston. Most recently, she served as the Director of 
the New York City Department of City Planning and Chair of the 
City Planning Commission.
    I am confident in her experience, and I am confident in her 
ability. She is going to be leading a big economic team, and 
there are certainly some big economic challenges.
    Next, Lisa Wang is nominated to serve as Assistant 
Secretary of Commerce for Enforcement and Compliance. This role 
is about using some of our strongest tools for protecting 
American jobs and businesses against trade rip-offs. That 
includes investigating and addressing dumping by foreign 
companies and unfair government subsidies. The Enforcement and 
Compliance office also works closely with USTR on key trade 
enforcement issues.
    Ms. Wang previously served as a Senior Attorney in the 
Office of the Chief Counsel for Trade Enforcement and 
Compliance at the Commerce Department. She also served as 
Assistant General Counsel in the Office of the U.S. Trade Rep 
and has experience in private practice. The bottom line is, she 
is a specialist in the areas of trade law dealing with 
enforcement and compliance, and she is the right person for the 
right job.
    This committee takes a special interest in what I call 
``trade done right.'' It is about fighting for American jobs, 
workers, businesses, farmers, and ranchers by strongly 
enforcing trade laws and creating new opportunities to sell 
American-made goods and services across the world. It is as if 
they are two sides of one coin. You want to have tough 
enforcement to protect American jobs and ensure we get a fair 
shake, and then you want to go out and create new opportunities 
for us to add value to products and then ship them, 
particularly Oregon products, all over the world.
    Ms. Lago and Ms. Wang will be excellent additions to that 
team. I want to congratulate them on their nominations, and I 
am looking forward to that discussion.
    Thank you.
    Senator Crapo?
    [The prepared statement of Chairman Wyden appears in the 
appendix.]

             OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. MIKE CRAPO, 
                   A U.S. SENATOR FROM IDAHO

    Senator Crapo. Thank you, Senator Wyden.
    Welcome, Ms. Lago and Ms. Wang, and congratulations on your 
nominations.
    If confirmed, the nominees before us will have key roles in 
overseeing and operating the Department of Commerce's 
International Trade Administration, or ITA. ITA plays an 
important role in promoting market access and redressing unfair 
trade practices. Both functions are critical to American 
prosperity.
    For example, Hamilton Manufacturing in Twin Falls, ID 
successfully utilized ITA's export promotion services to locate 
new partners in Chile. There are many other companies in Idaho 
and across the country that can benefit from such assistance.
    Ms. Lago, I look forward to hearing your views today on how 
ITA can expand export opportunities for America's farmers, 
businesses, and workers. In terms of unfair trade practices, 
our industries have to be able to compete on a level playing 
field, including by having recourse to relief under our 
antidumping and countervailing laws when appropriate. This is 
particularly important right now when China is spending record 
sums on industrial subsidies. Ms. Wang, I hope you will share 
your insights on how ITA can administer the trade remedy laws 
effectively.
    I remind both nominees that ITA's success in its mission is 
contingent on a strong partnership with Congress. This is true 
not just because Congress has authority over trade policy under 
our Constitution, but because members are in the best position 
to understand the needs of our constituents. I hope the 
nominees today will confirm that they would closely consult 
with this committee if confirmed.
    I look forward to hearing the nominees' testimony and their 
responses to our questions.
    Thank you.
    [The prepared statement of Senator Crapo appears in the 
appendix.]
    The Chairman. Thank you very much, Senator Crapo.
    We will hear from Ms. Lago, and then we will hear from Ms. 
Wang. We will have then some procedural requirements, but let's 
go forward with Ms. Lago, who is on the web. Ms. Wang will then 
go next.
    Ms. Lago, you are out in cyberspace, I believe, somewhere, 
and we would like to hear from you.

  STATEMENT OF HON. MARIA LOUISE LAGO, NOMINATED TO BE UNDER 
  SECRETARY FOR INTERNATIONAL TRADE, DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE, 
                         WASHINGTON, DC

    Ms. Lago. Thank you so much, Chairman Wyden. Chairman 
Wyden, Ranking Member Crapo, and members of the Senate Finance 
Committee, thank you for welcoming me here and for allowing me 
to testify virtually. It is a tremendous privilege to be 
considered by this committee as the nominee for Under Secretary 
for International Trade at the Department of Commerce. 
Considering the achievements of those who have served in this 
position in prior administrations, it is humbling to be here 
today.
    It is increasingly important that our Nation remain the 
global leader on trade, especially as we look to a post-
pandemic world. If confirmed, I will treat the role of leading 
the ITA with the significance that it deserves.
    Before I discuss my priorities, I would like to take a 
brief moment to recognize three major influences in my life. 
First, my partner of 47 years, my beloved architect husband 
Ronald Finiw. Ron is the son of Ukrainian parents who our 
country welcomed as displaced persons following World War II. 
Ron and I met at Cooper Union, which provided each of us with a 
tuition-free education for which we are eternally grateful. I 
am also grateful to Congress for the Work-Study Program, which 
allowed me to earn the funds that I needed to support myself 
while in college. Second, my mother, Maria Pita Salto, a 
Spanish immigrant and a proud American, who raised me 
bilingually and who passed along her rock-solid ethical core. 
And finally, my late father Louis Lago, child of Spanish 
immigrants and a World War II Navy veteran.
    My parents instilled in me a lifelong love of learning, 
bursting with pride when I became my family's first college 
graduate. My father's career as a 30-plus-year civilian 
employee of the Department of Defense set a powerful example 
for his children. My brother Paul Lago has spent his entire 
career as a Federal civil servant also at DoD. And my Dad's 
lessons have shaped my career in Federal, State, and municipal 
government, a career that has focused on supporting jobs for 
the American people--stable, well-paying jobs that support 
families and communities.
    Throughout my time in government, I have seen the power of 
trade and investment to improve lives. During my 7 years at 
Treasury, I worked with the World Bank and its regional 
counterparts to increase women's access to capital, allowing 
them to build businesses and support both their families and 
their communities. I came to see firsthand that, over the 
longer term, these investments create export opportunities for 
U.S. businesses of all sizes, which in turn create more jobs 
for U.S. workers.
    Similarly, when I was President and CEO of New York State's 
economic development arm, I saw the multifaceted benefits of 
the investments that we made. I helped revitalize the decaying, 
formerly industrial Brooklyn waterfront where my grandfather 
had worked as a cook on a tugboat. Some of you may have 
personally enjoyed the result of this initiative, Brooklyn 
Bridge Park, which has grown into a major recreational hub, as 
well as a national and international tourist draw, contributing 
significantly to the vibrancy, the livability, and the economic 
health of my hometown and of our Nation.
    Of course, ITA not only supports U.S. businesses and 
exporters; it plays an essential role in ensuring that our 
trading partners are abiding by the rules of the road. My prior 
service heading international affairs at the U.S. Securities 
and Exchange Commission, a formidable enforcement agency, gives 
me a deep-seated appreciation of the importance of ensuring 
that other nations comply with our trade agreements and, when 
they do not, deploying our robust enforcement tools on behalf 
of American workers and businesses.
    When competing on a level playing field, U.S. businesses 
and workers can successfully innovate and succeed. And their 
success bolsters American competitiveness, our economic and 
national security, and the lives of the American people.
    If I have the honor of being confirmed, I look forward to 
being a committed partner to this committee and Congress in 
general, as well as a passionate, tireless advocate for the 
people of the United States of America. I look forward to any 
questions you may have of me.
    Thank you.
    [The prepared statement of Ms. Lago appears in the 
appendix.]
    The Chairman. Thank you very much.
    And we have Ms. Wang in person. Welcome.

STATEMENT OF LISA W. WANG, NOMINATED TO BE ASSISTANT SECRETARY 
      FOR ENFORCEMENT AND COMPLIANCE, INTERNATIONAL TRADE 
     ADMINISTRATION, DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE, WASHINGTON, DC

    Ms. Wang. Thank you, Chairman Wyden, Ranking Member Crapo, 
and members of the committee. I am humbled and honored to be 
here today as President Biden's nominee to serve as Assistant 
Secretary of Commerce for Enforcement and Compliance. I am 
grateful that the administration has entrusted me with this 
position, and I am thankful for the support that Secretary 
Raimondo and her team have shown me.
    I would like to begin by thanking my father, Frank Xiaohang 
Wang. He came to the United States in his early thirties 
knowing almost no English but believing deeply in the American 
Dream. He believed that America is a country where hard work 
would lead to success. He believed that America is a place 
where fairness matters. It was through his sheer determination 
and endless optimism that our family rose from near poverty to 
a cozy life in the suburbs of East Greenbush, NY. My father 
passed away a few years ago but would have been so delighted to 
see me here today, taking pictures and trying to shake your 
hands. There will never be a better cheerleader, and I would be 
remiss to not acknowledge him here.
    I would also like to thank my mother, Tina Congying Wang, 
who worked a lifetime of minimum wage jobs to afford me the 
opportunity to be before you today. She has lived her life for 
her family's health and happiness, and I am proud to have her 
watching today. There is a straight line from my parents' 
sacrifices to my success, and I remain forever thankful for 
their support and guidance.
    I also want to thank my husband, Tim Kovacs, and my two 
daughters for their encouragement and support. Thank you for 
always pushing me to take risks and finding the joy in life.
    I came to the United States when I was 5 years old, not 
knowing any English but believing deeply in my father's 
American Dream. This belief is what led me to a career in 
international trade. I believe that the hard work of American 
workers and American businesses should not be undercut by 
unfair trade practices. I have spent my career representing 
U.S. industries seeking a level playing field against unfair 
subsidization and dumping. In doing so, I have seen 
manufacturers go from the brink of closure to capacity 
expansions because of effective trade enforcement. When our 
foreign competitors play by the same rules--when trade is 
fair--no one can beat the American worker.
    As an attorney with the Office of the U.S. Trade 
Representative, I defended the United States in WTO cases 
seeking to overturn our U.S. CVD laws and to weaken our trade 
enforcement objectives. I have led WTO cases against countries 
like China to stop their use of industrial policies that target 
U.S. and other export markets.
    The highlight of my career, however, has to be the many 
years that I spent working within Commerce's Enforcement and 
Compliance. E&C has a dedicated team of public servants who 
work to ensure that our U.S. trade laws are rigorously 
enforced. As foreign governments and foreign competitors become 
more sophisticated in their use of industrial subsidies and 
other unfair trade practices, we must work harder and smarter 
to counter these practices.
    If confirmed, I look forward to working closely with you to 
ensure that our U.S. trade remedy laws are transparently and 
vigorously enforced.
    Thank you, and I would be happy to answer any questions you 
may have.
    [The prepared statement of Ms. Wang appears in the 
appendix.]
    The Chairman. Thank you very much, Ms. Wang. We have some 
obligatory questions that we are going to ask of you and your 
colleague Ms. Lago now.
    I will start with, first, is there anything that you are 
aware of in your background that might present a conflict of 
interest with the duties of the office to which you have been 
nominated?
    Ms. Wang. No.
    Ms. Lago. No.
    The Chairman. Okay. Second, do you know of any reason, 
personal or otherwise, that would in any way prevent you from 
fully and honorably discharging the responsibilities of the 
office to which you have been nominated?
    Ms. Wang. No.
    Ms. Lago. No.
    The Chairman. Third, do you agree without reservation to 
respond to any reasonable summons to appear and testify before 
any duly constituted committee of the Congress, if you are 
confirmed?
    Ms. Wang. Yes.
    Ms. Lago. Yes.
    The Chairman. Finally, do you commit to provide a prompt 
response in writing to any questions addressed to you by any 
Senator of the committee?
    Ms. Lago. Yes.
    Ms. Wang. Yes, Mr. Chairman.
    The Chairman. Very good.
    All right, let's start. And I will begin with some 
questions for you, Ms. Lago, on supply chain disruptions. 
Obviously, this is an enormously important challenge. I just 
spent a week going all over the State of Oregon, virtually 
every nook and cranny in the State, and I just heard constantly 
about the challenges of increased demand, port congestion, 
disrupting so much in the way of movement of everyday consumer 
goods.
    Now in my home State where growing, making, and shipping 
products for export is a priority, we have one out of four jobs 
involved around trade. The trade jobs often pay better than do 
non-trade jobs. Supply chain disruptions have made it more 
difficult to get Oregon blueberries and apples and other 
products to markets around the globe.
    So, there is much to do. And let me just start with kind of 
the first two.
    First, the United States needs to make major investments in 
U.S. essential manufacturing. This would, for example, include 
the FABS Act, the important bipartisan legislation. I want to 
thank Senator Crapo. He and I worked very closely on it. But up 
and down this dais you will see Democrats and Republicans who 
understand how important it is to support domestic 
semiconductor manufacturing.
    I worked very hard--very hard--to include it in the Build 
Back Better package. We are now going to have legislation come 
from the House and focus on it in the Senate as well. That is a 
special priority of mine.
    Second, the United States has also worked with allies to 
ensure secure and reliable supply chains for critical supplies. 
And here we would be talking about steel and pharmaceutical 
ingredients.
    And finally, the government needs to crack down on trade 
cheating that undermines the ability of our workers to be able 
to compete fairly in tough markets.
    So, Ms. Lago, you are available online. If confirmed as 
Under Secretary of Trade, you are going to oversee much of the 
Department of Commerce's response to supply chain disruption. 
Tell us how you are going to pull together analysis, 
enforcement, and compliance at the International Trade Office 
to address these extraordinary challenges we are facing with 
the supply chain.
    Ms. Lago. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman, for highlighting 
this issue, which is front-of-mind for so many. As you know, 
ITA has a number of tools in its toolkit that it can deploy to 
help address this issue.
    I will note that, while the U.S. has experienced supply 
chain disruptions in the past periodically over the years, this 
one is different. COVID-19 has shut down the global economy, 
and the supply chain disruptions that we are seeing are global 
in nature.
    We know that the supply chain is controlled by the private 
sector, so we need to work with them as they need to cooperate 
to get us through this.
    Turning specifically to ITA, you mentioned two of the tools 
that we have. The first is our Industry and Analysis team, 
which can perform extensive market analyses and can focus on 
strengthening the competitiveness of U.S. industries.
    Similarly, we know that there are suppliers in the world 
that operate in anticompetitive ways. And ITA also has within 
it a wealth of strong enforcement and compliance units which 
we--of course, if confirmed, I would stand ready to deploy in 
support of addressing the supply chain concerns.
    The Chairman. Let me turn--did you have anything else that 
you wanted to add to that, Ms. Lago?
    Ms. Lago. No. Thank you.
    The Chairman. All right.
    Let us turn to digital trade. It seems to me that we are at 
something of a fork in the road with respect to digital trade 
innovation. And this has been one of my priorities since Day 1 
when I came to the United States Senate. And I have had a 
chance to sort of pursue a host of issues, whether it is 
section 230 Internet tax freedom, digital signatures--the list 
kind of goes on and on--to try to nurture opportunities for 
high-skill, high-wage jobs and, at the same time, promote the 
principles of openness and freedom on the Internet.
    And it seems to me now, we still are trying to bring 
countries together around those principles of openness and 
freedom on the Internet, but there is another road that we have 
to deal with where antagonistic nations build walls around 
their digital economies that stifle innovation while trampling 
the online freedoms of their citizens.
    As I indicated, Ms. Lago, this is an area where I have 
spent a considerable amount of time both writing legislation 
and then, with Senator Crapo and others, trying to advance 
these ideas that promote openness and freedom on the Internet 
here in this committee.
    So we need to have leadership at the office that provides 
the opportunity to have a critical economic engine for our 
country and also the greatest possible platform for the open 
exchange of ideas.
    If you are confirmed, Ms. Lago, how would you ensure that 
the International Trade Administration hits those twin 
challenges--tackling censorship and authoritarian barriers to 
digital trade--in a way that promotes democratic values in 
labor and human rights, while at the same time creating the 
opportunity of the high-skill, high-wage jobs that digital 
trade promotes?
    Ms. Lago. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It would be hard to 
state the issue, the challenge, more eloquently than you did, 
while also highlighting the opportunity that is there in 
digital trade.
    I am pleased to say that Ambassador Tai has spoken to the 
importance of this, and that Secretary Raimondo, while in the 
Asia-Pacific, is hosting a forum on Women in Technology with a 
particular focus on the digital economy.
    If confirmed, I would so look forward to being able to work 
with you to tap into the expertise of you and your team and 
that of other members of Congress so that I would be able to 
take the tools within ITA's toolkit and deploy them across the 
interagency, because the issues that you have raised in digital 
trade will require the participation of numerous agencies in 
government. And I would so look forward to prioritizing this 
issue, if I had the honor of being confirmed.
    The Chairman. Very good.
    Senator Crapo?
    Senator Crapo. Thank you, Senator Wyden.
    First of all, I want to just mention to both of you that I 
strongly support Senator Wyden's reference to our efforts on 
semiconductors. We need badly to strengthen and promote our 
semiconductor industry in the United States. And I just wanted 
to make that note.
    Senator Wyden also asked my first question, basically, Ms. 
Lago, and I will just pursue it a little bit further, with 
regard to digital trade. It is very critical. And in the 
context of the conversation you just had with Senator Wyden, 
the question I have for you is, I believe that the United 
States should negotiate digital trade agreements to assure that 
the United States, and not China, sets the rules in this 
critical area.
    I just returned from a congressional trip to Indochina 
where we went to the Philippines, to Taiwan, and to India, and 
trade was critical in each of the discussions we had in those 
areas. Do you agree that the United States should pursue 
digital trade agreements with our allies?
    Ms. Lago. Thank you, Ranking Member Crapo, for again 
highlighting the importance of digital trade as being so 
essential to our economy today, and also the economy of the 
future.
    I think it is extremely important, as you know, to align 
ourselves with countries that share our commitment to 
democracy, to rule of law, and to work with them in partnership 
so that we end up with high standards, so that we do not cede 
this area to countries that engage in trade practices that are 
abhorrent to us.
    And so, if confirmed, I would so welcome being able to work 
with you, this committee, and the interagency to see how we can 
best work with our allies and partners globally to achieve 
these multiple goals that we have in the digital trade arena.
    Senator Crapo. Thank you.
    Just one more quick question for you, because I do want to 
get on to Ms. Wang before I run out of my time. A China-led 
trade agreement, the Regional Comprehensive Economic 
Partnership, will enter into force on January 1st. China has 
also applied to join the Trans-Pacific Partnership.
    I am deeply concerned that China is seeking to supplant the 
United States when it comes to setting the rules for trade in 
the Indo-Pacific. Do you think the United States needs to 
reexamine TPP, including what improvements could be made? That 
is to Ms. Lago.
    Ms. Lago. Thank you, Ranking Member Crapo, for that 
question. I do think it is extremely important that the U.S. be 
present in the Asia-Pacific and the Indo-Pacific regions. I am 
pleased that, as we are here in this hearing today, Secretary 
Raimondo is in the region.
    I am pleased that President Biden has announced an Asian 
economic dialogue, and that the Secretary, as part of her trip 
to the region, has noted that we need to develop an Indo-
Pacific economic framework, one that is going to look to 
enhance the resilience, inclusion, and sustainability of our 
trading relationships, and the interests of the middle class in 
our countries.
    And so, I would look forward, if confirmed, to bringing the 
tools that ITA has to the table to make sure that we are 
engaged and committed partners with our allies in this effort 
in this important region.
    Senator Crapo. Well, thank you. And I hope that that 
engagement and that framework will involve focusing on 
bilateral and multilateral trade agreements with critical 
allies in the region.
    Ms. Wang, the Department of Commerce from time to time 
seeks to settle antidumping and countervailing duty cases by 
negotiating suspension agreements or other arrangements. These 
are international agreements that impose terms and conditions 
on trade, and should be thus subject to congressional 
oversight.
    However, the Department of Commerce's engagement with this 
committee on such negotiations has often been spotty. Do you 
agree that the Department of Commerce must keep this committee 
apprised of efforts to resolve any antidumping or 
countervailing duty proceedings through an international 
agreement?
    Ms. Wang. Senator Crapo, thank you for this question. And I 
certainly understand the importance of your role in oversight, 
enforcement, and compliance matters. If confirmed, I would 
absolutely commit to maintaining open lines of communication 
with your offices on these matters. Thank you.
    Senator Crapo. Thank you very much. I appreciate that, and 
I am also about to run out of time, Senator Wyden.
    The Chairman. Thank you, Senator Crapo.
    Senator Menendez is next, and I think he is on the web.
    [No response.]
    The Chairman. All right; we have lots going on today, so we 
await our colleagues. And, Senator Crapo, I have one additional 
question, and then should we still be waiting--oh, there we go. 
You are spared my additional question at this time, Ms. Wang.
    Senator Cassidy, when you get settled, we will recognize 
you for your time.
    Senator Cassidy. Thank you.
    Ms. Wang, I am not sure how specific you can be on this. 
There are domestic producers that are being harmed by unfair 
trade. I represent a State with a lot of fisheries, 
particularly shrimp, and there have been allegations of 
dumping, from India in particular, as regards my folks.
    What can you do to help these producers obtain the relief 
they are entitled to under the law?
    Ms. Wang. Senator Cassidy, thank you very much for this 
question. And, given my background as a trade remedy 
practitioner, this is an area I care very deeply about: giving 
a voice to American workers and helping small and medium 
enterprises like fisheries and seafood to find a voice in 
trade.
    If confirmed, I would work to ensure that there is rigorous 
enforcement of the antidumping and countervailing duty laws 
against all unfair trade practices. Thank you.
    Senator Cassidy. Now the last administration promised to 
self-initiate more antidumping and countervailing duty cases, 
but only did so once. So I think my folks would want to hear 
that there would be action upon that pledge, knowing that the 
previous administration only initiated one antidumping 
initiative. Any thoughts on that?
    Ms. Wang. Senator, again, thank you for that question. 
Antidumping and countervailing duty proceedings are an 
important issue, particularly in helping small businesses find 
effective trade relief, and I take that seriously. I know that 
within the Office of Enforcement and Compliance there already 
is a pre-petitioning unit, and a health initiation unit within 
Enforcement and Compliance.
    If confirmed, I would work with those units to find a way 
forward in helping these small businesses and American workers. 
Thank you.
    Senator Cassidy. I am told that normally only the two 
largest foreign producers are reviewed, but I am also told by 
stakeholders that the Department rarely uses its authority to 
sample a representative group of producers to examine. So, year 
after year, the largest foreign producers are resampled, but 
there are a whole lot of folks beneath who are maybe exploiting 
the system and not being sampled.
    So what can you do about that?
    Ms. Wang. Senator, thank you for that question. And I would 
note that the statute does not provide a preference on choosing 
the largest producers and exporters versus a sampling 
methodology based on statistically valid methodologies.
    Senator Cassidy. So, you are suggesting that Congress needs 
to change the law--and I am looking at my chair and my 
ranking--so that it is not just dictated to be the same two 
every year, but it would be, as you said, a statistically 
representative sampling of all the producers sending in?
    Ms. Wang. Senator, thank you for allowing me to have a 
little bit of follow-up to that. I would note that the workload 
of Enforcement and Compliance has increased dramatically in the 
past few----
    Senator Cassidy. I would argue, though, that a 
statistically significant sampling would lower workload because 
you are not wasting time on people who know they are going to 
be inspected--and so therefore you are wasting your time. You 
still get the compliance and have to respond to the complaints, 
but you are stuck doing the two that know they are going to be 
busted if they are out of line. Otherwise, you have a more 
statistically--again, I am speaking to the chair and the 
ranking member, so I am hoping from your lips goes to their 
ears----
    Ms. Wang. Senator Cassidy, I very much appreciate your 
question, and I would note that these are very fact-specific 
findings and proceedings, and it is not always the two largest 
exporters that are chosen in these proceedings.
    Commerce has used sampling in previous proceedings, and I 
would note that, if confirmed, I would be willing to discuss 
with you----
    Senator Cassidy. Now let me ask--you can correct me, but I 
am also under the impression that sampling has not been for, 
okay if 10 percent of that which we sampled falls out of line, 
therefore, we are going to extrapolate from that sample to the 
entire amount coming from this particular business. Rather, it 
has only been sent to reflect that particular amount, for 
phytosanitary issues, for example. Is that correct? And if not, 
is that an accurate statistically significant way to sample?
    Ms. Wang. Senator, I am willing to discuss this further 
with you, if confirmed. I am unsure as to the particular 
question you just raised about photosanitary measures.
    Senator Cassidy. Okay, I yield back. Thank you.
    The Chairman. Senator Cassidy, first of all, I think you 
have raised a very important issue, this question of sampling 
of foreign products sent to the United States. The first 
question I think we are going to explore is--and I look forward 
to working with the ranking member and my colleague from 
Louisiana--does the office have the existing authority to 
actually do some of what Senator Cassidy is talking about? And 
so, we will have to sort that out. And if they do, then we will 
have to see why it is not being used. And then possibly we 
should look at legal ways to do it. But I think my colleague 
makes a good point, and we will follow it up.
    Senator Cassidy. Thank you.
    The Chairman. Very good.
    Okay; we are joined by Senator Menendez.
    Senator Menendez. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
    Ms. Wang, the President, as a candidate, promised that he 
would return the jurisdiction of the export licensing of 
semiautomatic weapons from the Commerce Department back to the 
Department of State, from which the Trump administration took 
it. Now of course the President can do this by simple 
regulation without the need for legislative approval, but until 
that happens, the Department is providing no information to 
Congress as to what lethal weapons, including sniper rifles and 
assault rifles, are being sold to what countries or foreign 
persons, and in what quantities, and under what conditions.
    What is the status of the implementation, to your 
knowledge, of the President's promise to the American people?
    Ms. Wang. Senator, thank you for the question. The mission 
of Enforcement and Compliance is to counter unfair trade 
practices on the matters you speak of. I know that other 
interagencies are working on it, and so I do not have the 
particular details to provide you on that.
    Senator Menendez. Do you support the President's promise?
    Ms. Wang. Senator, thank you for allowing me to have that 
follow-up. I know enough to know that there are very complex 
issues involved in this. And at this time, I do not think it 
would be appropriate for me to comment.
    Senator Menendez. Okay; so I did not ask you about the 
complex issues. The President made a promise. Do you support--
you are a presidential nominee. Do you support the President's 
promise?
    Ms. Wang. Senator, if confirmed, I would want to learn more 
about this issue----
    Senator Menendez. Okay; thank you. Until the President's 
promise is implemented, will you commit to provide to the 
committee of jurisdiction over arms sales specific information 
about what semiautomatic weapon sales are being considered for 
export, including the foreign recipient, the number of weapons, 
conditions, and end-use monitoring measures, as well as the 
exports that have been approved?
    Ms. Wang. Senator, again, thank you for this question. I 
would----
    Senator Menendez. Please do me a favor. Do not thank me for 
the question anymore. It only takes time. Can you give me an 
answer, yes, or no?
    Ms. Wang. Senator, I do not know enough about this issue to 
provide a comment either way.
    Senator Menendez. Well, you are going to have jurisdiction 
in part over this issue, so if you do not know much about it, 
that is a problem. Let me just say, I expect you are not the 
first nominee in this field who is unwilling to give an answer. 
Now I have tried to be supportive of the President's nominees, 
but I will not be able to be supportive if I cannot get a clear 
answer. So, I hope that Commerce gets the message.
    Let me ask you this, on a different matter. One of the main 
weaknesses of the Phase One deal with China was that it lacked 
any sort of enforcement measures to ensure China held up their 
end of the bargain. As a result, as of August China has only 
met 62 percent of its purchase commitments under the Phase One 
deal.
    If confirmed, you would play a significant role in the 
enforcement of U.S. trade policy. Do you agree that, without 
proper enforcement measures, any deal with China is likely to 
be less effective?
    Ms. Wang. Senator, I would like to clarify that the mission 
of Enforcement and Compliance is to counter unfair trade 
practices such as antidumping and countervailing duty. The 
objective of Enforcement and Compliance is to find the 
existence and magnitude of dumping and subsidization.
    On the issues you speak of, of the Phase One deal, I know 
that other offices within Commerce and the interagency, 
including the U.S. Trade Representative, are working on that 
issue now. If confirmed, I would want to learn more about what 
role Enforcement and Compliance can have in that process. But I 
do want to make clear that the mission of----
    Senator Menendez. What do you think your job is going to 
be? Maybe you can edify me. What do you think your job is going 
to be, if you are confirmed?
    Ms. Wang. As I just--Senator, thank you. The primary 
responsibility of my position as Assistant Secretary is to 
ensure that the trade remedy statutes, antidumping, 
countervailing duties, safeguards, suspension agreements, are 
rigorously enforced. And, if confirmed----
    Senator Menendez. The trade remedies require enforcement, 
right?
    Ms. Wang. Yes. Yes, Senator.
    Senator Menendez. Well, and part of my question is the 
enforcement of agreements that we have, including the 
enforcement of the agreements we have with China. If there is 
no enforcement, then it is insignificant, what we agreed to. Is 
that at least something you can agree to?
    Ms. Wang. Senator, I also want to make clear here that the 
number of antidumping and countervailing duty orders on China 
is significant. They counter the effective and targeted 
processes that China undertakes to undermine American 
businesses and U.S. workers. So, in that matter, Enforcement 
and Compliance has rigorously and transparently enforced the 
U.S. AD/CVD laws.
    Senator Menendez. Let me ask you one last question and see 
if you can convince me to vote for your nomination. Will you 
commit to ensuring that resolving the softwood lumber dispute 
with Canada continues to be a top priority?
    Ms. Wang. Senator, I am recused from that matter because of 
my representation at my current place of employment.
    Senator Menendez. Oh, okay. All right. Well, this has been 
very elucidating. Thank you very much.
    The Chairman. Thank you, Senator Menendez.
    Next will be Senator Thune on the web.
    Senator Thune. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
    Ms. Lago, today there are companies facing serious supply 
chain crises, with Americans encountering empty store shelves, 
long wait times, and rising costs as the holiday season 
approaches. And I would say that ag producers in my State are 
also feeling the crunch, with capacity for their goods being 
hampered by a combination of surging demand for containerized 
shipping, and a massive backlog at our Nation's ports, 
particularly LA/Long Beach.
    This inefficiency has downstream effects on commodity 
prices for farmers and ranchers across the country, including 
in South Dakota. If confirmed, could you describe what actions 
you would take to ensure that U.S. businesses, including 
exporters of agricultural products, can rely on efficient and 
stable processing at U.S. ports? And I hope it is more than 
what is currently being done, because what is currently being 
done seems to be doing very little to address what has become a 
crisis in our supply chain.
    Ms. Lago. Thank you, Senator Thune, for highlighting the 
importance of pulling together to address the supply chain 
crisis. We know that there are real impacts, as you noted, for 
farmers, for ranchers, but also for American consumers. And if 
confirmed, I would be proud to be part of the administration 
that is working with the private sector, which does control the 
supply chain, and using the tools that we have at our disposal.
    Again, if confirmed, I would look to be part of an 
interagency group that so far has effectively had the important 
ports extend their hours of operation, that has worked with the 
major shipping companies, with the major retailers. I think a 
key facet that, if confirmed, IGA could bring to the table is 
our Industry and Analysis team, which can help analyze supply 
chain vulnerabilities. And I would see that analysis as being 
part of an overall solution.
    But again, I believe it bears repeating that the supply 
chain is run by the private sector. And we need to continue to 
urge them to come together and cooperate on sharing 
information.
    Senator Thune. And it is run, in many respects, by the 
private sector. There are also port authorities which are run 
by cities, et cetera, that are involved as well. But a lot of 
the things that can be done by the Federal Government, the 
levers that we control, have to do with the regulatory 
requirements, and allowing, for example, independent truckers 
to come in, which would entail taking on the Teamsters 
organization, and also lightening up on hours of service, other 
things that can be done and should be done by the 
administration and can be done here at the Federal level in 
Washington. Those are levers and tools that can be used, and I 
hope that you would put pressure on the administration to do 
such things. Because absent taking those sorts of actions, I 
think we are going to continue in this swirl of people talking 
about it and focusing on it, but nothing actually being done to 
address it.
    Ms. Wang, in your written testimony you state that American 
workers and American businesses should not be undercut by 
unfair trade practices. You also state that, as foreign 
governments and foreign competitors become more sophisticated 
in their use of industrial subsidies and other unfair trade 
practices, we must work smarter and harder to counter these 
practices.
    Do you believe that China declaring itself as a developing 
country at the WTO undercuts American businesses and corrodes 
trust in the rules-based trading system?
    Ms. Wang. Senator, thank you for that question. In terms of 
trade, China is a threat. They take aggressive anticompetitive 
measures against U.S. businesses that harm American workers, 
like flooding our markets with cheap steel and aluminum.
    If confirmed, I would use the full force of the AD/CVD laws 
to counter these distorted practices. Thank you.
    Senator Thune. I have a bipartisan resolution to address 
China's ``developing country'' status at WTO, and I would 
encourage the administration to take on this issue.
    Finally, Ms. Lago, you talk about the importance of our 
Nation remaining a global leader on trade, especially in the 
post-pandemic world. As you know, Trade Promotion Authority 
expired in July, and it needs to be renewed. The administration 
has not made TPA a priority, and it is now beginning to chill 
progress on new trade deals such as the U.S.-UK DSA, or Digital 
Services Agreement, and with Asia-Pacific countries.
    In order to remain a global leader on trade, how important 
is it that the United States proactively engage in trade 
agreements? And what is going to happen if the U.S. sits on the 
sidelines? And tell me what you are going to do to get the 
administration to submit a new Trade Promotion Authority 
proposal for Congress to consider?
    Ms. Lago. Thank you, Senator, and thank you for 
highlighting the importance of the U.S. continuing to be a 
leader globally. As you note, it is especially important in the 
Indo-Pacific region to counter the threats that Ms. Wang 
eloquently and forcefully laid out.
    I do think that it is important to have the type of 
engagement in this region that the President called for in 
calling for an Asian economic dialogue. It is important to 
have--and if confirmed, I will work on--the Indo-Pacific 
economic framework that Secretary Raimondo announced yesterday. 
It is only by engaging with allies and partners in the region 
that we can most effectively assure that we have high-quality, 
high-standard trade based on the rule of law.
    Senator Thune. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would focus like 
a laser on that region, and I think it is important for us to 
have Trade Promotion Authority so we can get deals done quicker 
and more efficiently in this competitive global marketplace.
    Thank you.
    The Chairman. Thank you, Senator Thune.
    I think Senator Carper is on the web.
    Senator Carper. He is on the web, and he is ready to join 
in the proceedings.
    The Chairman. Please proceed, Senator Carper.
    Senator Carper. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
    To our witnesses, I would say to Ms. Wang----
    [Garbled speech.]
    Ms. Wang. I am so sorry. I could not hear that question. I 
apologize very much.
    Senator Carper. I mispronounced your name as well. It is 
pronounced ``Wong''?
    Ms. Wang. Oh, yes, it is. Thank you.
    Senator Carper. It is spelled ``Wang,'' but that would be 
the ``wong'' way to pronounce it, so we will call you ``Wong'' 
for today's purposes. Thank you for joining us.
    And, Ms. Lago, I understand your dad was a World War II 
veteran. Navy, is that right?
    Ms. Lago. Proudly Navy.
    Senator Carper. My dad was World War II veteran, Navy. A 
bunch of my uncles were as well, and one was killed in a 
kamikaze attack. We bleed Navy blue in our family. So we thank 
you for your dad's service.
    Years later when I served as Governor of Delaware--I was 
Governor from 1993 to 2001--I was privileged to oversee a 
period of strong job growth, and I have been told that more 
jobs were created in that 8-year period than were created in 
the history of the State of Delaware. And I would note that I 
did not create one of them, but we worked really hard in my 
administration with the legislature and the business community 
and others to create a nurturing environment for job creation 
and job preservation.
    Unfortunately, if we fast-forward to the past 
administration, our international trade policy was 
characterized--too often--by chaos and by uncertainty, which is 
really the opposite of what we need.
    My question is for both Ms. Lago and Ms. Wang. If 
confirmed, both of you will be in positions of implementing and 
enforcing our trade policies. How will you help foster greater 
certainty and greater predictability in our international trade 
system for the benefit of American businesses and workers?
    Ms. Lago, you can go first, please.
    Ms. Lago. Thank you, Senator. At the heart of this is 
engagement and communication--engagement with our allies and 
partners, and open communication with the various stakeholders. 
We know that we have a wide variety of stakeholders, some with 
differing perspectives, but the important thing is to hear from 
our industries; to hear from our businesses, our farmers, our 
ranchers; to hear from our workers; and to hear from Congress. 
And so I cannot over-emphasize the importance of keeping open 
lines of communication.
    The second thing that I would emphasize is the importance 
of working in the interagency. We know that trade is a 
multifaceted arena, and there are other agencies within the 
U.S. Government that are an important part of the trade 
equation.
    Senator Carper. That is a great point.
    Ms. Wang, the same question, please.
    Ms. Wang. Thank you, Senator. Accountability is the answer 
here. Trade remedies ensure that countries are held accountable 
for their unfair trade practices. And the AD/CVD process gives 
the American workers a voice in trade, and ensures that the 
unfair trade practices that harm them are being properly 
addressed. Thank you.
    Senator Carper. Thank you, ma'am.
    A second question--and this will be for Ms. Lago. Ms. Lago, 
I am impressed, and my colleagues are as well, with respect to 
your depth of experience in public service. One of the most 
valuable skills in almost any management role is the ability to 
bring different stakeholders to the table and find common 
ground.
    If confirmed, one of your responsibilities would include 
collaborating with some of the other agencies whose 
responsibilities include trade. But for the purposes of 
strengthening American competitiveness, here is my question. 
Can you share some insights into your approach to collaborative 
work and how your previous success in finding common ground 
would shape your service, if confirmed in this position?
    Ms. Lago. Thank you for that question, Senator. You are so 
right that in confronting any complex issue--even with as many 
tools as ITA has at its disposal--it will not be nearly as 
effective if it does not reach out. And that outreach has to be 
across the Department of Commerce, and across the interagency. 
This is something that is so familiar to me from my role at 
Treasury, the 7 years that I spent as Assistant Secretary for 
International Markets and Development.
    As important as collaboration is when operating 
domestically, I think that it is maybe even more important 
internationally, because we need to be Team USA with respect to 
the rest of the world.
    And I would like to highlight one of the factors of 
collaboration, and that is working with the expert career staff 
at the Department of Commerce. There is so much expertise 
lodged there, and if confirmed, I would so look forward to 
learning from them, working with them, and then collaborating 
in the way that I just described.
    Senator Carper. Great comments. Thank you both for your 
willingness to serve, and thank you for your the testimony here 
today. Good luck.
    The Chairman. Thank you, Senator Carper.
    Senator Whitehouse?
    Senator Whitehouse. Thanks, Mr. Chairman. Good morning to 
both of you.
    My first question is for Ms. Lago, and it has to do with 
the carbon efficiency advantage that the U.S. enjoys over 
China. I am looking at a table here based on data from the 
International Energy Agency, which shows the carbon efficiency 
advantage index between the U.S. and China at 3.2 in our favor.
    And with a carbon advantage like that, Ms. Lago, what would 
you expect if we were able to deploy a border adjustment for 
carbon emissions with China? Presumably that would confer 
pretty significant advantage on American trade exports and 
manufacturing, if in fact we are about a third as carbon-
intense as China.
    Ms. Lago. Thank you, Senator, for raising an issue that 
touches upon a number of different facets. One is highlighting 
the fact that, among China's anticompetitive and distorting 
practices is the fact that many of their industries operate not 
in accordance with the environmental standards that our country 
prides itself on. Second, in highlighting our carbon advantage, 
it says that there are opportunities for U.S. businesses to 
take advantage of the technological edge that we have here to 
create new markets and thus new jobs for Americans.
    With respect to the border adjustment tax, were I to have 
the honor of being confirmed, I would look forward to learning 
from you and your staff, and from the experts at the Commerce 
Department, more about this so that I could then have an 
informed discussion with you.
    Senator Whitehouse. But as a basic proposition, if China is 
now getting away with essentially free pollution at a ratio of 
3 to 1 compared to American competitors, that gives them an 
unfair advantage against their American competitors, does it 
not?
    Ms. Lago. Thank you, Senator. The importance of holding 
China to its international obligations cannot be overstated. 
And again, if confirmed, I would look forward to learning more 
about this border adjustment.
    Senator Whitehouse. So, last question to Ms. Wang and also 
to Ms. Lago, if there is time. Pirate fishing, illegal fishing, 
IUU fishing it is often called, amounts to about a third of the 
fish taken out of the ocean. It is a pretty big deal. China is 
very involved in predatory fishing practices, outraging many 
neighboring countries with their practices in their sovereign 
waters.
    The result is intense damage to our oceans, a common 
resource for the world, and also intense damage to U.S. fishing 
interests that have to compete against these unfair, cheating 
pirates. And yet that does not seem to get much attention in 
our trade conversations. Can you express to me what your level 
of interest and engagement will be to suppress IUU fishing, if 
you are confirmed to your positions? First, Ms. Wang.
    Ms. Wang. Senator, thank you for the question. The issue of 
pirate fishing, including the use of forced labor in that, is 
an important issue, and one I would note that Commerce's 
Enforcement and Compliance Office of Policy and Negotiations 
has been working on with the interagency, including the U.S. 
Trade Representative, in the fishery negotiations. And if 
confirmed, I would look forward to learning more about this 
with the interagency and seeing what E&C's role can be in it.
    Senator Whitehouse. Ms. Lago?
    Ms. Lago. Thank you, Senator. I would echo Ms. Wang's 
comments, and would also note that, if confirmed, I would also 
look to Commerce's Industry and Analysis Unit, ITA's Industry 
and Analysis Unit, to see how their skills, their tools, can be 
deployed to address this issue.
    Senator Whitehouse. Thanks. To anybody listening, your 
SHERPAs and all, I would suggest that we need to do a much 
better job at getting ahead of this. And for those of us who 
are from coastal States that have fishing communities, we are 
getting increasingly fed up with the low priority that pirate 
fishing receives from administration after administration. 
Thank you.
    The Chairman. I am going to recognize Senator Cortez Masto, 
but I just want to say, if anything, Senator Whitehouse is 
being far too diplomatic. The stall ball that has been played 
for years and years on this fishing issue as China pillages--
pillages--our fisheries and damages coastal communities, is 
unconscionable. It is inexcusable. And I will be watching very 
closely the activities that are coming up in terms of 
negotiations. And if progress is not made, we are going to 
pursue legislation to up the ante and ensure that we finally 
can end the absurd practice of just sort of standing around and 
letting China pillage our fisheries.
    I thank my colleague from Rhode Island for raising it----
    Senator Whitehouse. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
    The Chairman. And he has been more diplomatic than I am 
prepared to be after all of these years of going around the 
mulberry bush and nothing happening.
    My friend from Nevada has been kind enough to say that 
after her questions, she will wrap up and handle the questions 
for the record. She is a very valued member of the committee, 
and I so appreciate her help.
    Senator Cortez Masto [presiding]. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
To the nominees, congratulations, and welcome today.
    Let me start with something that, obviously, we are all 
hearing about and is of concern. I know the administration is 
working on implementing solutions, but the delay at airports is 
a complex issue with many contributing factors that continues 
to frustrate consumers and businesses in my home State.
    So, to Ms. Wang and Ms. Lago, if confirmed to your 
respective new roles at Commerce, how would you, if at all, be 
able to provide immediate relief or work on this issue as it 
pertains to the delays at airports? And, Ms. Wang, let me start 
with you.
    Ms. Wang. Senator, thank you for that question. If the 
pandemic has shown us anything, it is the importance of the 
domestic supply chain's resiliency. And the role of Enforcement 
and Compliance is to counter unfair trade practices that 
undermine this growth and this resiliency.
    So, if confirmed, I would work to ensure that any unfair 
trade practices that undermine resiliency in U.S. job growth by 
unfair trade practices are counter-resisted by the AD/CVD law. 
Thank you.
    Senator Cortez Masto. Thank you.
    Ms. Lago?
    Ms. Lago. Thank you, Senator. This is a global issue, and 
so, if confirmed, I would look forward to working with allies 
and partners who are also experiencing these types of 
disruptions which affect all citizens.
    Part of the solution is investing in American 
infrastructure and workers. And so, passage of the 
infrastructure bill is part of the longer-term solution. We 
also need companies, the private sector--which controls the 
supply chain--to provide more transparency about where the 
bottlenecks are, how long they believe it will take to address 
them.
    If confirmed, I will look forward to deploying ITA's tools, 
the Enforcement and Compliance tools that Ms. Wang has just 
spoken to, but also ITA's Industry and Analysis team, which can 
help analyze the supply chain vulnerabilities.
    Senator Cortez Masto. Thank you. I appreciate your comments 
on this important issue. And that is one of the reasons why I 
joined Senators Baldwin, Brown, Rosen, and others in the 
introduction of the Supply Chain Resiliency Act. This will help 
to alleviate our current supply chain bottlenecks and prevent 
future disruptions by investing in American companies, reducing 
our reliance on foreign supply chains, and ensuring that 
critical products are made in America. And I am hopeful that 
the Commerce Department will be supportive of this legislation.
    Ms. Wang, let me go back to you. As Assistant Secretary of 
Commerce, you will be responsible for the enforcement and 
compliance of trade laws. I noticed in your background you have 
extensive knowledge of U.S. antidumping and countervailing duty 
laws.
    How will you ensure compliance with trade laws when goods 
are imported and exported? And can you talk a little bit about 
your thoughts on that, based on your experience as well?
    Ms. Wang. Senator, thank you for the question and allowing 
me to speak to my experience as a trade practitioner. I know 
that the American worker and American businesses, including 
small and medium-sized enterprises, having a voice in that 
process is important to making sure that unfair trade practices 
are being properly addressed by the AD/CVD laws.
    I think, if confirmed, I would work to ensure that we are 
using all of the tools in our trade remedy toolbox to go after 
unfair trade practices, to make sure that the resiliency of 
U.S. businesses and American workers is not being hurt by these 
practices. And so I just look forward to getting confirmed. 
Thank you.
    Senator Cortez Masto. Thank you.
    And, Ms. Lago, you spent 7 years at Treasury as Assistant 
Secretary for International Markets and Development--again, 
extensive experience that will benefit you, if confirmed to 
this position. Can you share how that experience informs your 
perspective and prepares you to serve as the Under Secretary of 
Commerce for International Trade?
    Ms. Lago. Thank you for the question, Senator.
    My time at Treasury exposed me to the international 
economic architecture. It exposed me to my counterparts, which 
included not just other finance ministries, but also trade and 
industry ministries. And it showed me the importance of working 
across the U.S. Government, of working with members of 
Congress, and then also of working with allies and partners 
globally, both bilaterally and multilaterally. And if 
confirmed, I would look forward to bringing that experience 
with me to ITA.
    Senator Cortez Masto. Thank you. Thank you both again. 
Congratulations, and we appreciate you being here as well.
    I understand we have Senator Lankford joining us on the 
web. Senator?
    Senator Lankford. Thank you. Thanks for that introduction.
    Ms. Lago, I want to be able to clarify some questions with 
you on this. If confirmed, you will be handling the nonmarket 
economies list. Obviously, that is exceptionally important to 
us in our competitiveness. I have pushed to be able to have 
Russia considered to be on that nonmarket economies list. I 
would be interested to be able to get your feedback on that, or 
your willingness to be able to at least study that issue.
    Ms. Lago. Thank you, Senator, for raising the issue of 
Russia being added to nonmarket status. NME is an important 
distinction for purposes of antidumping duties and how they are 
calculated, as you know, Senator.
    It is a highly fact-specific and technical determination 
that is based on multiple factors that are laid out. If 
confirmed, I would look forward to working with Commerce's 
expert career staff to look at the factors that are there, and 
any time that the issue of NME comes up, to look at the factors 
and also, given your interest, Senator, to seek your input on 
this.
    Senator Lankford. I will look forward to that dialogue.
    As you know, Belarus had asked to be taken off of that 
nonmarket economies list in the past. The Trump administration 
had said ``no'' to that. About 70 percent of the economy is 
state-
operated, and currently Lukashenko from Belarus and Putin, 
their cooperation seems to be accelerating that issue of 
nonmarket economies. Would you maintain Belarus as a nonmarket 
economy at this point?
    Ms. Wang. Senator----
    Ms. Lago. Senator----
    Senator Lankford. That is for Ms. Lago.
    Ms. Lago. Thank you, Senator. If confirmed, I would commit 
to looking into the issue. At this point, not being within the 
Commerce Department, I do not have access to information other 
than what we see publicly, the distressing situation with 
Belarus.
    Senator Lankford. We will follow up on that in the days 
ahead.
    One of the areas you have dealt with in the past is the 
CFIUS review. One of the proposals that I have had is for a 
mandatory CFIUS review on areas like agricultural investments, 
technology investments, and others for entities that are coming 
out of a nonmarket economy. We have seen it recently in 
stories, in just the last 48 hours, on China placing companies 
in Italy, for instance, and being able to pick up a Chinese 
company. But as they traced it back, they were producing 
technology in Italy, and they found out it was actually a 
Chinese Government-owned entity, a state-owned company. In 
Communist China, it is going to be very, very common, actually.
    So my question is, for nonmarket economies, would you 
support a mandatory review for entities within a nonmarket 
economy purchasing into the United States for agriculture, 
technology, or other areas?
    Ms. Lago. Thank you for raising the importance of CFIUS as 
a national security tool. And I followed with interest 
Congress's adoption of FIRRMA, which I think made very 
beneficial changes to the authorities that CFIUS has been 
given.
    One of the important tools within FIRRMA was the focus on 
working with allies to unveil investment review, I think for 
many of the reasons that your example brings to the fore. And 
so certainly, if confirmed, I would welcome learning more about 
your legislation.
    Senator Lankford. Okay. Let's talk about that in the 
future, then, to be able to maintain that, because an NME 
review, a CFIUS review for these nonmarket economies, I think 
will be very important for a lot of the investment that is 
happening now in so-called ``private'' companies that are 
clearly state-owned by countries. And that initial piece of 
that, I think, will be important.
    One last piece on this, and that is the issue about human 
rights abuses. I offered an amendment when I came to this 
committee--it was actually voted down by every Democrat on the 
committee--on trying to exclude Uyghur-developed solar panels 
and such that would come in, because of the human rights abuses 
for the Uyghurs at this point.
    Interestingly enough, just a couple of weeks ago in the 
Build Back Better bill in the House, they actually took out the 
section that would prevent Uyghur forced labor products from 
coming into the United States. And then John Kerry, just last 
week, made a statement that keeping out Uyghur-made solar 
panels and all that happens there is not in his lane.
    I am trying to figure out whose lane it is in, and what 
your role would be, Ms. Lago, in trying to prevent the products 
that are coming into the United States that are done with 
forced labor.
    Ms. Lago. Senator, like you, I abhor the forced labor and 
the human rights' abuses that the Chinese Government is 
inflicting, particularly on the Uyghurs. And if confirmed, I 
would look forward to working with you, with this committee, 
and also with the interagency on this topic of forced labor.
    It is a topic that requires many different government 
agencies to pull together, but I want to state for me, being as 
clear as possible, that China's treatment of the Uyghurs is 
unacceptable.
    Senator Lankford. And you would say that is in your lane to 
help prevent that coming into the United States?
    Ms. Lago. If confirmed, I would welcome being part of the 
solution to the issue of forced labor in China.
    Senator Lankford. All right; thank you.
    Senator Cortez Masto. Thank you, Senator Lankford.
    Senator Brown?
    Senator Brown. Thank you, Madam Chair, Senator Cortez 
Masto.
    Congratulations to both of you on your nominations. For the 
first time in memory--and I include the administrations of both 
parties--we finally have an administration that puts workers at 
the center of our trade policy.
    I was very unhappy with the Trump trade policy. It sounded 
good, but it was more corporate trade agreements until we fixed 
USMCA, and I thank Senator Cortez Masto for her work on that, 
and particularly Chairman Wyden for his work. But the former 
administration--the former Obama-Biden administration--was 
essentially long on trade. And later today, Ms. Lago--and we 
were having an individual one-on-one conversation--I will ask 
you some more pointed questions than that discussion.
    I see important progress on the trade agreement negotiation 
front, but we need more aggressive changes in enforcement. I am 
very comfortable with U.S. Trade Rep Tai and the administration 
she is putting together, in large part because of her history 
of putting workers at the center of our trade policy and our 
economic policy. I am less comfortable with Commerce and want 
to hear more from both of you, especially when we talk later, 
Ms. Lago, of Obama administration policy and how that may color 
the Commerce Department.
    So I hear from businesses across Ohio encountering issues 
with dumping of Chinese-sourced products into the U.S. market. 
We know that China has historically used every tool at its 
disposal to get around our trade laws. I agree, certainly, with 
my Oklahoma colleague about his comments about the Uyghurs, but 
I also hear those comments from Senators who essentially kowtow 
to China and have given American corporations what they wanted 
in our trade policy with China. Now we focus on human rights as 
we should, but we also have to focus on enforcement.
    I introduced my bipartisan bill with my Ohio colleague, and 
with Senators Rubio and Casey, Level the Playing Field 2.0, to 
update our trade remedy laws for better enforcement. China has 
a playbook. We know they build up their overcapacity of a 
specific product. They target American businesses for illegal 
dumping. They have done this for steel and iron. They make it 
so that small businesses cannot compete. They are doing it now 
in the solar sector.
    We have the biggest solar manufacturer in the country near 
Toledo. I know what they are up against, and they are about to 
do this, the Chinese are, for materials that are sensitive for 
our national security.
    So, Ms. Wang, I would like to thank you for being here; 
and, Ms. Lago, thank you for doing this remotely.
    Ms. Wang, I have a series of ``yes'' or ``no'' questions 
for you on the tools that we have to address illegal dumping 
and AD/CVD circumvention. So, my series of questions.
    Do you believe a union company in Lima, OH should have to 
lay off hundreds of workers before our government can respond 
to the dumping activity in our manufacturing industry?
    Ms. Wang. Senator Brown, thank you for the question. I want 
to assure you that the voices of union members and American 
workers are absolutely heard in the AD/CVD process.
    Senator Brown. That was not my question though, but thank 
you for that. Glad to hear that.
    Do you believe a union company in Lima should have to lay 
off hundreds of workers before the government can respond to 
the dumping activity?
    Ms. Wang. Senator, I do not believe that there should be 
layoffs of American workers due to unfair trade practices of 
countries like China.
    Senator Brown. Do you believe a company in Youngstown that 
has already demonstrated financial harm from illegal dumping 
should have to wait 14 months--14 months--for duties to be 
applied against the product that is harming their companies?
    Ms. Wang. Senator Brown, there are statutory deadlines and 
requirements that are necessary of Enforcement and Compliance. 
But if confirmed, I certainly would work to find efficiencies 
in that process.
    Senator Brown. The harm had already been shown, okay?
    Do you believe a small business in my hometown of Mansfield 
should have to spend $3 million minimum to bring one of these 
issues before the ITC and the Department of Commerce?
    Ms. Wang. Senator, I believe strongly that we should find 
ways to reach out to American workers, and small and medium-
sized enterprises, so that they can obtain effective relief 
under the AD/CVD laws.
    Senator Brown. In a case where duties are finally applied, 
but that same product starts appearing from a completely 
different country, understanding what is probably happening, do 
you believe a company in Defiance, OH should have to restart 
the entire process with a brand new petition?
    Ms. Wang. Senator Brown, there are remedies under the anti-
circumvention laws that do not require industries to file a new 
AD/CVD petition. If confirmed, I would like to work on those 
issues with you.
    Senator Brown. And do you believe--last question--do you 
believe a company in Springfield, OH, developing sensitive 
national security products, that already discloses itself to 
the Department of Commerce, should have to disclose itself to 
the public and face retaliation from China during the petition 
process?
    Ms. Wang. Senator, I believe these are highly fact-specific 
questions, and particularly those involving proprietary 
information. And if confirmed, I would want to learn more about 
that particular fact-specific proceeding.
    Senator Brown. I thought your answers were responsive. They 
were not exactly ``yes'' or ``no.'' I understand why, but once 
you are confirmed, I assume they will be. I vote for almost 
every Biden nominee. I am more, if not reluctant, certainly 
skeptical on trade issues, because I have seen over the course 
of Democratic and Republican Presidents a bias towards U.S. 
corporate interests that shut down production in this country 
and move overseas to sell their products back into this 
country. And the President of the Federal Reserve in Richmond 
once told me, ``Watch what I do, and let me know you are 
watching.''
    So, thank you for your willingness to serve, both of you. 
And, Ms. Wang, sorry. When you show up in person, you get more 
questions, but Ms. Lago, remotely, comes to my office later 
today. So, thank you both.
    Senator Cortez Masto. Thank you, Senator Brown.
    Okay, we are going to wrap up the hearing. I would like to 
thank all the members today for their participation. I would 
especially like to thank both nominees for their responses this 
morning.
    Regarding questions for the record, the deadline for 
members to submit QFRs will be next Tuesday, November 23rd, at 
5 p.m. That 5 p.m. deadline is firm.
    So, we would like to thank everyone again for their 
cooperation, and this hearing is adjourned. Thank you.
    [Whereupon, at 11:49 a.m., the hearing was concluded.]

                            A P P E N D I X

              Additional Material Submitted for the Record

                              ----------                              


                Prepared Statement of Hon. Mike Crapo, 
                       a U.S. Senator From Idaho
    Thank you, Senator Wyden.

    Welcome, Ms. Lago and Ms. Wang; and congratulations on your 
nominations. If confirmed, the nominees before us will have key roles 
in overseeing and operating the Department of Commerce's International 
Trade Administration--or ITA. ITA plays an important role in promoting 
market access and redressing unfair trade practices. Both functions are 
critical to American prosperity.

    For example, Hamilton Manufacturing in Twin Falls, ID successfully 
utilized ITA's export promotion services to locate new partners in 
Chile. There are many other companies in Idaho and across the country 
that can benefit from such assistance.

    Ms. Lago, I look forward to hearing your views today on how ITA can 
expand export opportunities for America's farmers, businesses, and 
workers. In terms of unfair trade practices, our industries have to be 
able to compete on a level playing field, including by having recourse 
to relief under our antidumping and countervailing laws when 
appropriate.

    This is particularly important right now when China is spending 
record sums on industrial subsidies. Ms. Wang, I hope you will share 
your insights on how ITA can administer the trade remedy laws 
effectively.

    I remind both nominees that ITA's success in its mission is 
contingent on a strong partnership with Congress. This is true not just 
because Congress has authority over trade policy under our 
Constitution, but because members are in the best position to 
understand the needs of our constituents. I hope the nominees today 
will confirm that they would closely consult with this committee if 
confirmed.

    I look forward to hearing the nominees' testimony and their 
responses to questions.

                                 ______
                                 
  Prepared Statement of Hon. Maria Louise Lago, Nominated to be Under 
       Secretary for International Trade, Department of Commerce
    Chairman Wyden, Ranking Member Crapo, members of the Senate Finance 
Committee, thank you for welcoming me here, and for allowing me to 
testify virtually. It is a tremendous privilege to be considered by 
this committee as the nominee for Under Secretary for International 
Trade at the Department of Commerce. Considering the achievements of 
those who have served in this position in prior administrations, it is 
humbling to be before you today. It is increasingly important that our 
Nation remain the global leader on trade, especially as we look to a 
post-pandemic world. If confirmed, I will treat the role of leading the 
International Trade Administration with the significance that it 
deserves.

    Before I discuss my priorities, I would like to take a brief moment 
to recognize three major influences in my life:

        My partner of 47 years, my beloved architect husband, Ronald 
Finiw. Ron is the son of Ukrainian parents who our country welcomed as 
displaced persons following World War II. Ron and I met at Cooper 
Union, which provided each of us with a tuition-free education for 
which we are eternally grateful. I am also grateful to Congress for the 
Work-Study Program, which allowed me to earn the funds I needed to 
support myself while in college.

        My mother, Maria Pita, a Spanish immigrant and proud American, 
who raised me bilingually and who passed along her rock-solid ethical 
core.

        And my late father, Louis Lago, child of Spanish immigrants 
and a World War II Navy veteran.

    My parents instilled in me a lifelong hunger for learning, bursting 
with pride when I became my family's first college graduate. My 
father's career as a 30-plus-year civilian employee of the Department 
of Defense set a powerful example for his children. My brother Paul 
Lago has spent his entire career as a Federal civil servant at the 
Department of Defense. And my Dad's lessons have shaped my career in 
Federal, State, and municipal government, a career that has focused on 
the importance of supporting jobs for the American people--stable, 
well-paying jobs that support families.

    Throughout my time in government, I have seen firsthand the power 
of trade and investment to improve lives. During my 7 years as Treasury 
Assistant Secretary for International Markets and Development, I worked 
with the World Bank and its regional counterparts to increase women's 
access to capital, allowing them to build businesses and support both 
their families and their communities. I came to see firsthand that, 
over the longer term, these investments create export opportunities for 
U.S. businesses of all sizes, which in turn create more jobs for U.S. 
workers.

    Similarly, when I was President and CEO of New York State's 
economic development arm, I saw the multifaceted benefits of the 
investments that we made. I helped revitalize the decaying, formerly 
industrial Brooklyn waterfront where my grandfather had worked as a 
cook on a tugboat. Some of you may have personally enjoyed the result 
of this initiative, Brooklyn Bridge Park, which has grown into a major 
recreational hub, as well as a national and international tourist 
draw--contributing significantly to the vibrancy, livability, and 
economic health of my hometown and our Nation.

    Of course, ITA not only supports U.S. businesses and exporters, it 
plays an essential role in ensuring that our trading partners are 
abiding by the rules of the road. My prior service heading 
international affairs at the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission, a 
formidable enforcement agency, gives me a deep-seated appreciation of 
the importance of ensuring that other nations comply with our trade 
agreements and, when they do not, deploying our robust enforcement 
tools on behalf of American businesses and American workers.

    When competing on a level playing field, U.S. businesses and the 
workers that they employ can successfully innovate and succeed. And 
their success bolsters American competitiveness, economic and national 
security, and the lives of the American people.

    If I have the honor of being confirmed, I look forward to being a 
committed partner to this committee, and Congress more generally, as 
well as a passionate, tireless advocate for the people of the United 
States of America.

    I look forward to any questions you may have for me.

                                 ______
                                 

                        SENATE FINANCE COMMITTEE

                  STATEMENT OF INFORMATION REQUESTED 
                               OF NOMINEE

                      A. BIOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION

 1.  Name (include any former names used): Lago, Maria Louise (AKA 
Lago, Marisa).

 2.  Position to which nominated: Under Secretary for International 
Trade, Department of Commerce.

 3.  Date of nomination: September 13, 2021.

 4.  Address (list current residence, office, and mailing addresses):

 5.  Date and place of birth: December 4, 1955; Brooklyn, NY.

 6.  Marital status (include maiden name of wife or husband's name):

 7.  Names and ages of children:

 8.  Education (list all secondary and higher education institutions, 
dates attended, degree received, and date degree granted):


 
    Educational                                               Date of
    Institution        Dates attended    Degree  received      degree
 
Harvard Law School   September 1979-May  J.D. cum laude    May 1982
                      1982
 
Brown University     September 1977-     none              n/a
 (Graduate School;    December 1977
 Applied Math
 Department)
 
The Cooper Union     September 1973-May  B.S. Physics      May 1977
                      1977
 


 9.  Employment record (list all jobs held since college, including the 
title or description of job, name of employer, location of work, and 
dates of employment for each job):

        Title: Director, NYC Department of City Planning; Chair, NYC 
        City Planning Commission.
        Employer: NYC Department of City Planning.
        Location: 120 Broadway, 31st Floor, New York, NY 10271.
        Dates: 3/2017-9/2021.
        Note: The two positions were held simultaneously.

        Title: Assistant Secretary for International Markets and 
        Development.
        Employer: United States Department of the Treasury.
        Location: 1500 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW, Washington, DC 20220.
        Dates: 2/2010-1/2017.

        Title: President and CEO (9/2008-6/2009); Advisor (7/2009-2/
        2010).
        Employer: Empire State Development Corporation (ESDC).
        Location: 633 Third Avenue, New York, NY 10017.
        Dates: 9/08-2/10.

        Title: Commissioner.
        Employer: New York State Department of Economic Development.
        Location: 633 Third Avenue, New York, NY 10017.
        Dates: 9/2008-6/2009.
        Note: Position was held simultaneously with my position as 
        President and CEO of ESDC.

        Title: Global Head of Compliance.
        Employer: Citi Markets and Banking (Citigroup, Inc.; Citigroup 
        Global Markets, Inc.).
        Location: 388 Greenwich Street, New York, NY 10013.
        Dates: 4/2003-9/2008.

        Title: Director of Global Workforce Development.
        Employer: Citigroup, Inc.
        Location: 390 Park Avenue, New York, NY 10022.
        Dates: 8/2001-3/2003.

        Title: Director, Office of International Affairs.
        Employer: U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission.
        Location: 100 F Street, NE, Washington, DC 20549.
        Dates: 2/1997-7/2001.

        Title: Chief Economic Development Officer; Director, Boston 
        Redevelopment Authority.
        Employer: City of Boston.
        Location: One City Hall Square, Boston, MA 02201.
        Dates: 2/1994-1/1997.
        Note: The two positions were held simultaneously.
        Title: General Counsel.
        Employer: New York City Economic Development Corporation (NYC 
        EDC).
        Location: 110 William Street, New York, NY 10038.
        Dates: 9/1990-2/1994.

        Title: Senior Vice President for Legal Affairs.
        Employer: New York City Industrial Development Agency.
        Location: 110 William Street, New York, NY 10038.
        Dates: 1991 (estimate)-2/1994.
        Note: Position was held simultaneously with my position as 
        General Counsel of NYC EDC.

        Title: Junior Partner; Associate.
        Employer: Nutter, McClennen and Fish.
        Location: World Trade Center West, 155 Seaport Boulevard, 
        Boston, MA 02210.
        Dates: 2/1986-8/1990 (Junior Partner, 1/1988-8/1990; Associate, 
        2/1986-12/1987).

        Title: Special Assistant to the Chairman.
        Employer: New York City Department of City Planning.
        Location: 22 Reade Street, New York, NY 10007.
        Dates: 10/1983-12/1985.

        Title: Law Clerk to the Honorable Hugh Bownes (deceased).
        Employer: U.S. Court of Appeals for the First Circuit.
        Location: James C. Cleveland Federal Building, 55 Pleasant 
        Street, Concord, NH 03301.
        Dates: 9/1982-8/1983.

        Title: Summer Associate.
        Employer: Berle Butzel Kass and Case.
        Location: Firm no longer exists.
        Dates: 06/1982-07/1982 (estimate).

        Title: Summer Associate,
        Employer: Cleary Gottlieb Steen and Hamilton,
        Location: One Liberty Plaza, New York, NY 10006.
        Dates: 6/1981-8/1981 (estimate).

        Title: Research Assistant.
        Employer: Harvard Law School Professor Lance Liebman.
        Location: 1585 Massachusetts Avenue, Cambridge, MA 02138.
        Dates: 5/1980-8/1980 (estimate).

        Title: Actuarial Assistant.
        Employer: William M. Mercer.
        Location: 99 High Street, Boston, MA 02110.
        Dates: 2/1978-8/1979 (estimate).

10.  Government experience (list any current and former advisory, 
consultative, honorary, or other part-time service or positions with 
Federal, State, or local governments held since college, including 
dates, other than those listed above):

        Member, Massachusetts Housing Partnership.

        Member, Clerk, Vice-Chairperson of Scituate (Massachusetts) 
        Planning Board.

        Member, Scituate (Massachusetts) Housing Partnership.

        Member, Scituate (Massachusetts) Fair Housing Committee.

11.  Business relationships (list all current and former positions held 
as an officer, director, trustee, partner (e.g., limited partner, non-
voting, etc.), proprietor, agent, representative, or consultant of any 
corporation, company, firm, partnership, other business enterprise, or 
educational or other institution):


------------------------------------------------------------------------
      Organization          Office held (if any)            Dates
------------------------------------------------------------------------
United Nations            Member, Board of          3/2017 (estimate)-9/
 Development Corporation   Directors ex officio      2021
                           (as a result of my
                           position as Chair of
                           the NYC City Planning
                           Commission)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Theatre Subdistrict       Member, Board of          3/2017 (estimate)-9/
 Council                   Directors ex officio      2021
                           (as a result of my
                           position as Director of
                           the NYC Department of
                           City Planning)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NYC Industrial            Member, Board of          3/2017 (estimate)-9/
 Development Agency        Directors ex officio      2021
                           (as a result of my
                           position as Chair of
                           the NYC City Planning
                           Commission)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Build NYC Resource        Member, Board of          3/2017 (estimate)-9/
 Corporation               Directors ex officio      2021
                           (as a result of my
                           position as Director of
                           the NYC Department of
                           City Planning)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
East Midtown Public       Member, Board of          8/2017 (estimate)-9/
 Realm Improvement Fund    Directors ex officio      2021
                           (as a result of my
                           position as Chair of
                           the NYC City Planning
                           Commission)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
European Bank for         Acting U.S. Director, ex  12/2013-11/2015
 Reconstruction and        officio (as a result of
 Development               my position as
                           Assistant Secretary for
                           International Markets
                           and Development of the
                           U.S. Department of the
                           Treasury)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Citigroup                 Managing Director         4/2003-9/2008
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Empire State Development  President and CEO         9/2008-6/2009
 Corporation (ESDC)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Boston Redevelopment      Director                  2/1994-1/1997
 Authority
------------------------------------------------------------------------
New York City Economic    General Counsel           9/1990-2/1994
 Development Corporation
------------------------------------------------------------------------
New York City Industrial  Senior Vice President     1991 (est.)-2/1994
 Development Agency
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Nutter, McClennen and     Junior Partner            1/1988-8/1990
 Fish
------------------------------------------------------------------------

12.  Memberships (list all current and former memberships, as well as 
any current and former offices held in professional, fraternal, 
scholarly, civic, business, charitable, and other organizations dating 
back to college, including dates for these memberships and offices):

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                       Office held (if
            Organization                    any)              Dates
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Cooper Union Engineering Advisory     Member            11/1998-2/2010
 Council
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NYC Investment Partnership            Member, Board of  3/2009-6/2009
                                       Directors
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Lower Manhattan Cultural Council      Member, Board of  4/2006-8/2008
                                       Directors
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Enterprise Foundation                 Member, Advisory  2002-2005
                                       Board
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hannah House                          Member, Board of  1997-6/2001
                                       Directors
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Women's Forum of Washington           Member            1997-2001
                                                         (estimate)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Massachusetts Women's Forum           Member            1994-1997
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Fannie Mae Housing Impact Advisory    Member            1995-1997
 Council
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Boston Management Consortium          Director          1995-1/1997
------------------------------------------------------------------------
National Economic Development and     Member, Board of  1991-1994
 Law Center; name was subsequently     Directors
 changed to the Insight Center for
 Community Economic Development
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Association of the Bar of the City    Member;           1991 (estimate)-
 of New York                           Committee on      1/1994
                                       Real Property
                                       Law and Special
                                       Committee on
                                       Government
                                       Counsel
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Massachusetts Housing Partnership     Member            1990
------------------------------------------------------------------------
(Boston) Metropolitan Area Planning   Member            1987-1990
 Council (MAPC)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
(Boston) South Shore Coalition (an    Member (1987-     1987-1990
 affiliate of MAPC)                    1990); Clerk
                                       (1988-1989);
                                       Vice-
                                       Chairperson
                                       (1988-1990)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Scituate (Massachusetts) Planning     Member (1987-     1987-1990
 Board                                 1990); Clerk
                                       (1987-1988);
                                       Vice-
                                       Chairperson
                                       (1988-1990)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Scituate (Massachusetts) Housing      Member            1988-1990
 Partnership and Scituate Fair
 Housing Committee
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Boston Bar Association (BBA)          Member;           1986-1990
                                       Committee on      (estimate)
                                       Real Property
                                       Law,
                                       Environmental
                                       Committee, and
                                       Special
                                       Committee on
                                       Minorities in
                                       the Profession
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Lawyers Clearinghouse on Affordable   Member            1987-1990
 Housing and Homelessness (joint                         (estimate)
 project of BBA and Massachusetts
 Bar Association)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Boston Law Firm Group; name was       Representative    1986-1990
 subsequently changed to the Boston    of the law firm   (estimate)
 Lawyers Group                         Nutter
                                       McClennen and
                                       Fish, my then-
                                       employer
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Scituate (Massachusetts) Democratic   Member            1988
 Town Committee
------------------------------------------------------------------------

13.  Political affiliations and activities:

        a.  List all public offices for which you have been a candidate 
        dating back to the age of 18.

       Scituate (Massachusetts) Planning Board; Member (1987-1990); 
Clerk (1988-1989); Vice-Chair (1988-1990).

        b.  List all memberships and offices held in and services 
        rendered to all political parties or election committees, 
        currently and during the last 10 years prior to the date of 
        your nomination.

       None.

        c.  Itemize all political contributions to any individual, 
        campaign organization, political party, political action 
        committee, or similar entity of $50 or more for the past 10 
        years prior to the date of your nomination.


Obama for America                           12/31/2011              $100
Obama for America                            6/29/2012            $1,000
Obama for America                            10/2/2012              $250
Presidential Inaugural Committee             1/12/2013              $150
Hillary for America                          6/24/2016            $2,700
Hillary for America                          8/23/2016            $2,700
Haley Stevens                                9/15/2017              $250
Biden Victory Fund                           9/21/2020            $2,800
 

14.  Honors and awards (list all scholarships, fellowships, honorary 
degrees, honorary society memberships, military medals, and any other 
special recognitions for outstanding service or achievement received 
since the age of 18):


------------------------------------------------------------------------
                  Description                     Dates (if applicable)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Cooper Union Alumni Hall of Fame                               2019
------------------------------------------------------------------------
U.S. Department of Treasury Alexander Hamilton                     2017
 Award
------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Office of Intelligence and Analysis (OIA)                      2015
 Medallion No. 28
------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Cooper Union: Presidential Citation                            1996
------------------------------------------------------------------------
German Marshall Fund, Fellowship for                               1989
 International Environmentalists
------------------------------------------------------------------------
National Science Foundation: Honorable Mention                     1977
------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Cooper Union: Full tuition scholarship for                1973-1977
 4 years of undergraduate education
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Sigma Pi Sigma (national physics honor             1976-1977 (estimate)
 society)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Morris Catholic High School: valedictorian                         1973
------------------------------------------------------------------------

15.  Published writings (list the titles, publishers, dates and 
hyperlinks (as applicable) of all books, articles, reports, blog posts, 
or other published materials you have written):

        During my time at the NYC Department of City Planning (NYC 
        DCP), U.S. Department of the Treasury (Treasury), and the U.S. 
        Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), I have published 
        articles, reports, and blog posts in my official capacity and 
        related to my government employment. These can be found on the 
        websites of these three government entities.

        For example, the NYC Department of City Planning frequently 
        releases publications in which I am identified as the Director 
        of the Department. They include:
                - Resilient Industry, Mitigation and Preparedness in 
                the City's Industrial Floodplain.
                - The Ins and Outs of NYC Commuting.
                - The Geography of Jobs.
                - North Brooklyn Industry and Innovation Plan.

        Less frequently, I have published articles on matters related 
        to my government employment. They include:
                - ``Opinion: After Amazon, NYC and Nassau must work 
                together,'' co-
                authored with Nassau County (NY) Executive Laura Curran 
                and published in the Long Island Business Net on 28 
                February 2019, https://libn.com/2019/02/28/opinion-
                after-amazon-nyc-nassau-must-work-together/.

        Prior to joining U.S. Treasury, I participated in, and 
        moderated, panels sponsored by FINRA (Financial Regulatory 
        Authority), Securities Industry Association (FINRA's 
        predecessor), Practicing Law Institute, American Bar 
        Association, Association of the Bar of the City of New York, 
        Massachusetts Continuing Legal Education, and Boston Bar 
        Association. In connection with these panels, written materials 
        were sometimes prepared (generally by a lawyer at a law firm, 
        who was also on the panel). I do not have a record of these 
        publications.

        Earlier on in my career, I had the following three 
        publications:
                - Association of the Bar of the City of New York, Real 
                Property Committee, 1992. Seminar on ``Hazardous 
                Materials Issues in Real Estate Transactions: 
                Negotiation of Commercial Documentation.'' Course 
                Materials: ``Environmental Clean-Ups: Who's Liable 
                Now?''
                - Massachusetts Continuing Legal Education, 1990. 
                Course materials: ``Important New Developments in 
                Wetlands and Waterways Regulation.''
                - Massachusetts Continuing Legal Education, 1989. 
                Course materials published as ``Massachusetts Zoning 
                Manual: Nonconforming Uses and Structures.''

16.  Speeches (list all formal speeches and presentations (e.g., 
PowerPoint) you have delivered during the past 5 years which are on 
topics relevant to the position for which you have been nominated, 
including dates):

        See NYC DCP speeches at: https://www1.nyc.gov/home/search/
        index.page?
        search-terms=marisa+lago.

        See Treasury speeches at: http://search.treasury.gov/
        search?affiliate=treasury&
        commit=Search&query=marisa%20lago.

        See SEC speeches at: https://secsearch.sec.gov/
        search?utf8=?&affiliate=sec
        search&query=Marisa+lago&commit=Search.

17.  Qualifications (state what, in your opinion, qualifies you to 
serve in the position to which you have been nominated):

        Over the years, I have acquired broad experience in diverse 
        areas that will serve me well if confirmed as Under Secretary 
        for International Trade at the Department of Commerce. My areas 
        of expertise include: international economic diplomacy; 
        national security; international development assistance; 
        international financial services regulation; Federal, State, 
        and municipal economic development; land use planning; Federal, 
        State, and municipal governance and policy; and leadership and 
        management of large, complex initiatives and organizations. 
        Throughout my career I have maintained a strong commitment to 
        public service, community involvement, and diversity, equity, 
        and inclusion.

        The breadth of my experience in both the public sector (at the 
        Federal, State, and local levels) and private sector is 
        reflected on my resume. The roles that best qualify me for the 
        position for which I have been nominated are my prior work for 
        the U.S. government.

        In my position as Assistant Secretary for International Markets 
        and Development at the Department of Treasury (2010-2017), I 
        led Treasury's role on the Committee on Foreign Investment in 
        the United States and directed Treasury's portfolio on trade in 
        financial services, international development assistance, 
        technical assistance, and international financial services 
        regulation.

        In my position as Director of International Affairs at the U.S. 
        Securities and Exchange Commission (1997-2001), I headed the 
        office responsible for all aspects of the SEC's international 
        activities, and played a key role in numerous international 
        initiatives involving: trade in financial services; 
        international accounting standards; regulation of financial 
        conglomerates; corporate governance; securities activities on 
        the Internet; and enhancing financial regulation in off-shore 
        financial centers.

        Throughout my career, I have been committed to outside civic 
        activities. These have included service on the Board of 
        Directors of the Lower Manhattan Cultural Council, the Advisory 
        Board of the Enterprise Foundation, the Housing Impact Advisory 
        Council of Fannie Mae, and the Board of Directors of the 
        National Economic Development and Law Center.

        I am fluent in Spanish, which has been helpful in both my 
        international and domestic positions.

                   B. FUTURE EMPLOYMENT RELATIONSHIPS

 1.  Will you sever all connections (including participation in future 
benefit arrangements) with your present employers, business firms, 
associations, or organizations if you are confirmed by the Senate? If 
not, provide details.

        Yes.

 2.  Do you have any plans, commitments, or agreements to pursue 
outside employment, with or without compensation, during your service 
with the government? If so, provide details.

        No.

 3.  Has any person or entity made a commitment or agreement to employ 
your services in any capacity after you leave government service? If 
so, provide details.

        No.

 4.  If you are confirmed by the Senate, do you expect to serve out 
your full term or until the next presidential election, whichever is 
applicable? If not, explain.

        Yes.

                   C. POTENTIAL CONFLICTS OF INTEREST

 1.  Indicate any current and former investments, obligations, 
liabilities, or other personal relationships, including spousal or 
family employment, which could involve potential conflicts of interest 
in the position to which you have been nominated.

        None.

 2.  Describe any business relationship, dealing, or financial 
transaction which you have had during the last 10 years (prior to the 
date of your nomination), whether for yourself, on behalf of a client, 
or acting as an agent, that could in any way constitute or result in a 
possible conflict of interest in the position to which you have been 
nominated.

        None.

 3.  Describe any activity during the past 10 years (prior to the date 
of your nomination) in which you have engaged for the purpose of 
directly or indirectly influencing the passage, defeat, or modification 
of any legislation or affecting the administration and execution of law 
or public policy. Activities performed as an employee of the Federal 
Government need not be listed.

        None.

 4.  Explain how you will resolve any potential conflict of interest, 
including any that are disclosed by your responses to the above items. 
(Provide the committee with two copies of any trust or other 
agreements.)

        In connection with the nomination process, I will consult with 
        the Office of Government Ethics and the designated agency 
        ethics official to identify potential conflicts of interest. 
        Any potential conflicts of interest will be resolved in 
        accordance with the terms of an ethics agreement. I am not 
        aware of any current potential conflicts.

 5.  Two copies of written opinions should be provided directly to the 
committee by the designated agency ethics officer of the agency to 
which you have been nominated and by the Office of Government Ethics 
concerning potential conflicts of interest or any legal impediments to 
your serving in this position.

        To be provided.

                       D. LEGAL AND OTHER MATTERS

 1.  Have you ever been the subject of a complaint or been 
investigated, disciplined, or otherwise cited for a breach of ethics 
for unprofessional conduct before any court, administrative agency 
(e.g., an Inspector General's office), professional association, 
disciplinary committee, or other ethics enforcement entity at any time? 
Have you ever been interviewed regarding your own conduct as part of 
any such inquiry or investigation? If so, provide details, regardless 
of the outcome.

        No.

 2.  Have you ever been investigated, arrested, charged, or held by any 
Federal, State, or other law enforcement authority for a violation of 
any Federal, State, county, or municipal law, regulation, or ordinance, 
other than a minor traffic offense? Have you ever been interviewed 
regarding your own conduct as part of any such inquiry or 
investigation? If so, provide details.

        I believe that I have been a party, in my representative 
        capacity only (and not as an individual), to lawsuits 
        challenging the actions of the following entities:

        NYC Department of City Planning.
        NYC City Planning Commission.
        Empire State Development Corporation.
        New York State Department of Economic Development.
        Boston Redevelopment Authority.
        New York City Economic Development Corporation.
        Scituate Planning Board.

        The records of any such lawsuits are available from the general 
        counsel of each of these entities.

        The following are the only times that I have been sued in my 
        personal capacity for activities related to my public service:

          WHILE EMPLOYED BY THE BOSTON REDEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY:
Court:                       Proceeding:    Role:          Date filed:
 
Suffolk (Massachusetts)      Civil action   Defendant      5/1997
 Superior Court Civil
 Docket #SUCV97-02875C
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Comments:
 
The plaintiff alleged employment discrimination, interference with
 constitutional rights, violation of Massachusetts Equal Rights Act, and
 intentional interference with advantageous relations. Case against
 Marisa Lago was dismissed for failure to state a claim.
������������������������������������������������������������������������
Agency:                      Proceeding:    Role:          Date filed:
 
Massachusetts Commission     Administrativ  None           Unknown
 Against Discrimination       e
 (MCAD)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Comments:
 
The plaintiff in the case above also filed a related administrative
 claim with the Massachusetts Commission Against Discrimination (MCAD).
 I have no further information about the MCAD claim, and believe that it
 was dismissed.
 



              WHILE SERVING ON THE SCITUATE PLANNING BOARD:
Court:                       Proceeding:    Role:          Date filed:
 
Plymouth (Massachusetts)     Civil action   Defendant      1990 (est.)
 Superior Court Civil
 Docket C.A. #90-1761B
 (Loretta E. Darien et al.
 v. Thomas Bledsoe et al.)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Comments:
 
The case was a challenge by the proponents of an animal shelter of the
 action of the Scituate (Massachusetts) Planning Board (SPB) in denying
 a site plan approval/special permit. The suit, which named both the SPB
 and each individual SPB member, was dropped by the plaintiffs.
 


The following are the only times that I have been a party in my 
personal capacity:


                        IN MY PERSONAL CAPACITY:
Court:                       Proceeding:    Role:          Date filed:
 
Suffolk (Massachusetts)      Civil action   Plaintiff      10/1994
 Superior Court Civil
 Docket #94-5219
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Comments:
 
The case was a dispute regarding proposed development of land adjacent
 to my then-home. I challenged the action of the Massachusetts
 Department of Environmental Protection (DEP) in affirming the granting
 of an Order of Conditions (O of C) by the Scituate (Massachusetts)
 Conservation Commission (SCC), acting as an arm of the Commonwealth of
 Massachusetts under the Massachusetts Wetlands Protection Act. The
 matter arose from the attempt of a speculator to build on an
 unbuildable lot located adjacent to my then-home. Development permits
 were denied (which was the result that I sought).
������������������������������������������������������������������������
Court:                       Proceeding:    Role:          Date filed:
 
Plymouth (Massachusetts)     Civil action   Plaintiff      12/1993
 Superior Court Civil                                       (est.)
 Docket #93-0927B
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Comments:
 
This is a case related to the previous case. I believe that I was the
 named plaintiff, but do not have records of this case. Also, I believe
 that there may have also been related administrative proceedings before
 the DEP, SCC, and Scituate Buildings Department. I do not have records
 of any such proceedings.
������������������������������������������������������������������������
Court:                       Proceeding:    Role:          Date filed:
 
U.S. Tax Court Docket        Civil action   Defendant      1987 (est.)
 #33526-87``S''
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Comments:
 
For the 1984 tax year, the IRS alleged a deficiency in my return (joint
 return with spouse). We challenged this determination. A decision
 entered on June 6, 1988 found that there was no deficiency and no taxes
 due.
������������������������������������������������������������������������
Court:                       Proceeding:    Role:          Date filed:
 
Unknown New York Court       Civil action   Plaintiff      1975 (est.)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Comments:
 
Challenge (along with a number of my classmates who were then Physics
 majors at Cooper Union) to the decision by Cooper Union to terminate
 the Physics program. I believe that plaintiffs dropped the challenge.
 


 3.  Have you ever been involved as a party in interest in any 
administrative agency proceeding or civil litigation? If so, provide 
details.

        No.

 4.  Have you ever been convicted (including pleas of guilty or nolo 
contendere) of any criminal violation other than a minor traffic 
offense? If so, provide details.

        No.

 5.  Please advise the committee of any additional information, 
favorable or unfavorable, which you feel should be considered in 
connection with your nomination.

        None.

                     E. TESTIFYING BEFORE CONGRESS

 1.  If you are confirmed by the Senate, are you willing to appear and 
testify before any duly constituted committee of the Congress on such 
occasions as you may be reasonably requested to do so?

        Yes.

 2.  If you are confirmed by the Senate, are you willing to provide 
such information as is requested by such committees?

        Yes.

                                 ______
                                 
      Questions Submitted for the Record to Hon. Maria Louise Lago
                  Question Submitted by Hon. Ron Wyden
                         u.s.-eu privacy shield
    Question. ITA is negotiating a new Privacy Shield agreement with 
the European Union to ensure market access for U.S. companies while 
addressing the Europeans' concerns about U.S. Government access to 
their data.

    If confirmed, how would you ensure that any Privacy Shield 
agreement is not one-sided, and also protects Americans' data from 
unreasonable surveillance by European government agencies?

    Answer. The United States and the European Union share a deep trade 
and investment relationship, which sustains millions of jobs on both 
sides of the Atlantic. Transatlantic data flows are an essential 
component of that two-way trade and investment. The original Privacy 
Shield decision was invalidated by the Court of Justice of the European 
Union (CJEU) based on concerns about government access to personal 
data. If confirmed, I would work with my counterparts across the U.S. 
Government and within the European Commission to find a sustainable 
solution that addresses the legal and also the economic ramifications 
of the CJEU's ruling. If confirmed, I look forward to working with you, 
your staff, and the interagency to consider how best to protect 
personal data on both sides of the Atlantic.

                                 ______
                                 
               Questions Submitted by Hon. Maria Cantwell
    Question. China is no doubt one of our most important trading 
partners and was the third largest export market for American products 
last year. In 2020, we exported $26.5 billion worth of agricultural 
products and $40.4 billion worth of service goods to China.

    My home State of Washington is a major exporter to China as well, 
exporting $9 billion worth of goods in 2020, making China Washington 
State's largest trading partner. The agreements outlined in the China 
Phase One purchasing agreement would benefit Washington State's 
economy. That being said, reports have shown that China is not on track 
to meet its purchasing targets. China is Washington State's third 
largest trading partner for agricultural products. In 2020, Washington 
State exported $518 million worth of agricultural goods to China. Top 
Washington State agricultural exports include $83 million worth of fish 
and seafood, $54 million worth of frozen potatoes, $51 million worth of 
cherries, $25 million worth of wheat, and $13 million worth of beef.

    China should have purchased $29.8 billion worth of agricultural 
products by the end of September to meet the target, but instead fell 
short at purchasing only $26.7 billion worth. The agreement was 
supposed to offset some of the effects of the trade conflict, so we 
need to ensure that China is on track to achieve the targets that they 
agreed to.

    USTR Ambassador Tai also agreed during her speech on the 
administration's China trade policy that we must hold China accountable 
to their commitments, and that certain provisions in the phase one 
agreement will need to be revisited.

    In your opinion, what can be done to improve China's performance in 
terms of the purchasing targets that they agreed to?

    Are the goals of the agreement realistic? Are there areas of the 
agreement that you think need to be reassessed or renegotiated?

    How do you plan to work with USTR to enforce the targets of the 
agreement without imposing economic harm to U.S. industries?

    Answer. If confirmed, I would work closely within ITA and with the 
U.S. Trade Representative and others in the U.S. Government as 
appropriate to ensure that the Chinese Government is held accountable 
for its commitments.

    In October, the Biden-Harris administration outlined the initial 
steps to realign U.S. trade policy towards China, which included 
China's performance under the Phase One agreement. It is important that 
the Chinese Government adhere to the commitments it made, and it is my 
understanding that USTR Tai is engaged in discussions with the Chinese 
Government to that end.

    It is also important to note that many concerns with respect to the 
Chinese Government were not addressed in the Phase One agreement, such 
as state-owned enterprises, subsidies, limiting market access, and 
other distortive and coercive economic practices. If confirmed, I look 
forward to working with the U.S. Trade Representative and others in the 
U.S. Government on these issues, as appropriate, and would work to 
ensure that workers and firms can compete on a level playing field. If 
confirmed, I look forward to working with you and your staff on this 
issue.

    Question. Among your responsibilities is the U.S. and Foreign 
Commercial Services. The FCS as it is known is a great service to U.S. 
companies working in foreign markets. I particularly would note how 
helpful the FCS is for U.S. small businesses seeking to enter and 
develop the Chinese market. Washington State exports $9 billion in 
goods in 2020, making China the largest trading partner for my State.

    In light of the current stress in the relationship, how can the FCS 
help to improve trading relationship--in a positive, constructive way--
for the U.S. and China?

    Answer. U.S. exports can create high-paying U.S. jobs. China is our 
Nation's third largest trading partner, taking over $120 billion in 
goods exports alone in 2020. While the Chinese market holds 
opportunities for U.S. exporters, there are still numerous non-tariff 
barriers to trade, as well as anti-competitive actions that need to be 
addressed--including the Chinese Government's theft of intellectual 
property, forced technology transfer, and subsidies for its businesses. 
If confirmed, I would work with the trade specialists and commercial 
diplomats in ITA on these issues.

    Question. In 2019, digital services exports accounted for 59 
percent of all U.S. services exports, generating a U.S. digital trade 
surplus of $220 billion that is shared by small and large companies and 
workers far outside the traditional tech sector. One in three small and 
medium-sized businesses report that they would not have survived the 
pandemic without digital tools, and two-thirds of small business 
employers say that technology can help them overcome export barriers. 
My home State of Washington is responsible for nearly 5 percent of the 
entire country's digital export volume, which directly and indirectly 
supports nearly 250,000 jobs across the information, technology, and 
communications sector.

    It is clear, especially over that last year that without the 
ability to trade digitally, American workers and businesses would have 
been put at a significant disadvantage. It is imperative that we create 
more opportunities for U.S. exporters to harness digital trade and push 
back on the growing threat of digital protectionism.

    I believe we need a bold new strategy on digital trade; one that 
modernizes our existing free trade agreements and seeks new bilateral 
and plurilateral digital rules that ensure America and our workers stay 
competitive in the 21st century and that businesses can compete on a 
level playing field. That is why I was pleased to hear that the U.S. 
and several European countries were able to come to an agreement on 
eliminating digital service taxes recently.

    Beyond dealing with foreign digital service taxes, what do you 
think are the most important digital trade issues that the United 
States must engage with trading partners on?

    The U.S.-EU Trade Technology Council hosted its first summit in 
Pittsburgh 2 months ago, and released a joint statement detailing a 
framework that would promote trade and innovation in the IT industry.

    Do you think the agreements in the joint statement adequately 
address U.S.-EU technology trade issues?

    In your opinion, are there any areas that need improvement?

    How do you plan to incorporate the working groups established in 
the joint statement in your work to promote bilateral trade and 
enforcement of trade agreements?

    Privacy is extremely important to me. We are working hard on 
getting a good bill out of the Commerce Committee. Do you see a clear 
path forward toward an agreement between the U.S. and the EU on 
Privacy?

    Answer. The U.S.-EU Trade and Technology Council (TTC) encompasses 
a wide range of bilateral policy issues, which necessitates a whole-of-
government approach and continued stakeholder engagement to refine 
broad priorities into actionable outcomes. If confirmed, I would work 
with my colleagues within the Commerce Department and the interagency 
to build on the Pittsburgh ministerial and facilitate continued 
collaboration with our U.S. agency counterparts, businesses, and other 
stakeholders. If confirmed, I look forward to working with you and your 
staff on these issues.

    There are significant commonalities between the TTC's 10 issue-
oriented working groups and ITA's daily work in expanding export 
opportunities for American businesses and mitigating unfair trade 
practices that disadvantage our businesses and workers. If confirmed, I 
look forward to working on issues that can directly benefit our 
companies and workers and would support the objectives of the TTC to 
reducing commercially significant barriers to trade that impact 
companies of all sizes.

    It is also my understanding that the Commerce Department and 
agencies across the U.S. Government are working to find a sustainable 
solution that addresses the legal and also the economic ramifications 
of the ruling of the Court of Justice of the European Union to 
invalidate the U.S.-EU Privacy Shield Framework. If confirmed, I look 
forward to working with you and your staff on these issues.

    Question. The United States and Canada have been engaging in a 
long-term trade conflict over softwood lumber that dates back to the 
1980s. Despite many rounds of negotiations and agreements, little 
progress has been made to reach a permanent solution. The previous 
agreement to suspend tariffs expired in 2015, and anti-
dumping and countervailing duties have been in place since 2017. This 
trade conflict not only hurt the timber industry but also contributed 
to a shortage of lumber in the United States, raising home construction 
costs for producers and consumers.

    Washington State has 22 million acres of forest land and a robust 
timber industry. My home State is also the second largest producer of 
lumber in the United States and the sector supports approximately 
42,000 workers, generating $28 million in revenue annually.

    While I support the effort to level the playing field for the U.S. 
timber industry and ensure U.S. competitiveness, I also believe that 
trade conflicts cannot continue indefinitely. We must work with Canada, 
a valuable and trusted trading partner, to reach a long-lasting 
solution.

    In your view, what are the main issue areas that need to be 
resolved first before an agreement could be reached with Canada?

    If confirmed, what would be your plan to negotiate a solution for 
ending the lumber conflict?

    Large trade conflicts that drag out over several years hurt the 
economy and the relationship that we have with the opposing country. 
How would you work to expedite the process for ending trade conflicts 
in a timely manner?

    Answer. The determinations in U.S. AD and CVD proceedings are the 
culmination of a quasijudicial investigative process that is mandated 
by U.S. law. The Commerce Department bases its findings on the factual 
information and the records of its proceedings, following methodologies 
provided under the laws, regulations, and longstanding practices. It is 
my understanding that while the Commerce Department would be involved 
in any formal consultations on this trade dispute with Canada, the U.S. 
Trade Representative is the lead agency with respect to the formal 
initiation of any potential negotiated settlement. If confirmed, I look 
forward to working with you and your staff on this issue.

                 Questions Submitted by Hon. Todd Young
    Question. If confirmed, understanding and advocating for American 
enterprises will be a key pillar of your job. For years, Hoosier 
businesses in Indiana have been confronted with major barriers to 
market access, particularly at the hands of China, and are often 
pressed to make trade-related concessions. For instance, businesses are 
forced to entertain outrageous demands like surrendering intellectual 
property or technology in exchange for access to Chinese markets. These 
moves are designed to benefit China's state-owned enterprises while 
keeping U.S. manufacturers at a disadvantage.

    How do you plan to tackle the market access barriers forced onto 
American businesses by the Chinese Communist Party?

    Relatedly, what are some key strategies that you believe would be 
beneficial to addressing this adverse action against American 
businesses?

    Answer. The Chinese Government engages in anticompetitive and 
coercive practices that harm American workers and businesses. For 
example, intellectual property theft, subsidies, cyber-based economic 
espionage, and other barriers undermine the competitiveness of U.S. 
firms. These policies create unlevel playing fields for U.S. workers 
and businesses. Many of our allies and partners share similar concerns 
with respect to the PRC's unfair economic practices. If confirmed, I 
would use all tools at ITA's disposal to address these issues. I would 
also work with Commerce staff and, when appropriate, the Office of the 
U.S. Trade Representative and other departments and agencies on these 
matters.

    I believe that we should approach trade barriers faced by American 
businesses through direct engagement with (1) U.S. stakeholders and the 
business community to help identify anticompetitive practices and non-
tariff barriers, and (2) the Chinese Government to hold them 
accountable for disruptive trade practices. This will involve 
engagement with the U.S. Trade Representative, the Department of State, 
and other U.S. Government agencies to address the core structural 
concerns posed by China's state-directed economic approach and 
distortive trade practices, which harm competition, businesses, and 
workers. If confirmed, I look forward to working with you and your 
staff on these issues.

    Question. As we have all experienced, the pandemic has accelerated 
the already existing squeeze of supply chain networks. Global 
disruptive events--like natural disasters, shipping container 
blockages, port shutdowns, and cyberattacks--are now more persistent 
and severe, which only illustrates the need to lessen our dependency on 
multiple foreign suppliers and complex supply chains.

    If confirmed, what is your strategic plans to monitor and address 
our Nation's supply chain challenges?

    How will you review and address regulatory issues to ensure our 
domestic supply chains are secure and cost-effective?

    Answer. If confirmed, I would work to support and build upon the 
efforts that are already underway across the executive branch to assess 
supply chain vulnerabilities under the President's executive order on 
supply chains. For example, I would work to support the Commerce 
Department's efforts on semiconductors. The Department led the 
development of a semiconductor supply chain 100-day report, which was 
published in June of this year. I also look forward to working with the 
Department of Homeland Security to publish the 1-year report on supply 
chains in the information and communications technology space in 
February. While government does not run these supply chains, the Biden 
administration is using every tool available to help make our supply 
chains more resilient over the long term.

    One of my top priorities would be to ensure that the International 
Trade Administration fully supports the White House and Commerce 
Department's efforts and any subsequent policy implementation to help 
address supply chain concerns. I would also support Secretary 
Raimondo's efforts in her role as a co-lead of President Biden's Supply 
Chain Disruptions Task Force to address near-term supply chain 
concerns. If confirmed, I look forward to working with you and your 
staff on these issues.

                                 ______
                                 
Prepared Statement of Lisa W. Wang, Nominated to be Assistant Secretary 
  for Enforcement and Compliance, International Trade Administration, 
                         Department of Commerce
    Thank you, Chairman Wyden, Ranking Member Crapo, members of the 
Committee. I am humbled and honored to be here today as President 
Biden's nominee to serve as Assistant Secretary of Commerce for 
Enforcement and Compliance. I am grateful that the administration has 
entrusted me with this position, and I am thankful for the support that 
Secretary Raimondo and her team have shown me.

    I would like to begin by thanking my father, Frank Xiaohang Wang. 
He came to the United States in his early thirties knowing almost no 
English but believing deeply in the American Dream. He believed that 
America is a country where hard work would lead to success. He believed 
that America is a place where fairness matters. It was through his 
sheer determination and endless optimism that our family rose from near 
poverty to a cozy life in the suburbs of East Greenbush, NY. My father 
passed away a few years ago but would have been so delighted to see me 
here today; taking pictures and trying to shake your hands. There will 
never be a better cheerleader, and I would be remiss to not acknowledge 
him here.

    I would also like to thank my mother, Tina Congying Wang, who 
worked a lifetime of minimum wage jobs to afford me the opportunity to 
be before you today. She has lived her life for her family's health and 
happiness, and I am proud to have her watching today. There is a 
straight line from my parents' sacrifices to my success, and I remain 
forever thankful for their support and guidance. I also want to thank 
my husband, Tim Kovacs, and my two daughters for their encouragement 
and support. Thank you for always pushing me to take risks and finding 
the joy in life.

    I came to the United States when I was 5 years old, not knowing any 
English but believing deeply in my father's American Dream. This belief 
is what led me to a career in international trade. I believe that the 
hard work of American workers and American businesses should not be 
undercut by unfair trade practices. I have spent my career representing 
U.S. industries seeking a level playing field against unfair 
subsidization and dumping. In doing so, I have seen manufacturers go 
from the brink of closure to capacity expansions because of effective 
trade enforcement. When our foreign competitors play by the same 
rules--when trade is fair--no one can beat the American worker.

    As an attorney with the Office of the U.S. Trade Representative, I 
defended the United States in WTO cases seeking to overturn our U.S. 
CVD laws and to weaken our trade enforcement objectives. I have led WTO 
cases against countries like China to stop their use of industrial 
policies that target U.S. and other export markets. The highlight of my 
career, however, is the many years that I spent working within 
Commerce's Enforcement and Compliance (E&C). E&C has a dedicated team 
of public servants who work to ensure that our U.S. trade laws are 
rigorously enforced. As foreign governments and foreign competitors 
become more sophisticated in their use of industrial subsidies and 
other unfair trade practices, we must work harder and smarter to 
counter these practices.

    If confirmed, I look forward to working closely with you to ensure 
that our U.S. trade remedy laws are transparently and vigorously 
enforced. Thank you, and I would be happy to answer any questions you 
may have.

                                 ______
                                 

                        SENATE FINANCE COMMITTEE

                  STATEMENT OF INFORMATION REQUESTED 
                               OF NOMINEE

                      A. BIOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION

 1.  Name (include any former names used): Lisa Wen-Jia Wang, Wen-Jia 
Wang.

 2.  Position to which nominated: Assistant Secretary for Enforcement 
and Compliance, International Trade Administration, U.S. Department of 
Commerce.

 3.  Date of nomination: August 9, 2021.

 4.  Address (list current residence, office, and mailing addresses):

 5.  Date and place of birth: June 12, 1980; Beijing, China.

 6.  Marital status (include maiden name of wife or husband's name):

 7.  Names and ages of children:

 8.  Education (list all secondary and higher education institutions, 
dates attended, degree received, and date degree granted):

        Georgetown University Law Center, Washington, DC.
        Dates attended: September 2003-May 2006.
        Degree received: Juris Doctor.
        Date Degree Granted: May 2006.

        Cornell University, College of Human Ecology, Ithaca, NY.
        Dates attended: September 1998-May 2002.
        Degree received: Bachelor of Science.
        Date Degree Granted: May 2002.

        Beijing Foreign Studies University, Beijing, China.
        Dates attended: January 2001-June 2001).
        Degree received: None (study abroad semester).

 9.  Employment record (list all jobs held since college, including the 
title or description of job, name of employer, location of work, and 
dates of employment for each job):

        Harris, Wiltshire and Grannis LLP, Washington, DC, legal 
        assistant (June 2002-June 2003).

        U.S. Department of State, Office of the legal adviser, 
        Washington, DC, legal extern (September 2004-May 2005).

        U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, Office of General 
        Counsel, Washington, DC, legal intern (May-June 2004).

        U.S. Embassy Beijing, Commercial Section, Beijing, China, legal 
        intern (July-August 2004).

        Dewey and LeBoeuf, LLP (formerly Dewey Ballantine LLP), 
        International Trade Group, Washington, DC, associate (2006-
        2009); law clerk (January-May 2006); summer associate (May-
        August 2005).

        U.S. Department of Commerce/U.S. Embassy Beijing, Commercial 
        Section, Washington, DC, Beijing, China, First Secretary, 
        Senior Import Administration Officer (June 2009-February 2012).

        Office of the U.S. Trade Representative, Executive Office of 
        the President, Washington, DC, Assistant General Counsel 
        (February 2012-November 2014).

        Chief Counsel for Trade Enforcement and Compliance, U.S. 
        Department of Commerce, Washington, DC, senior attorney 
        (November 2014-May 2016).

        Picard, Kentz and Rowe LLP, Washington, DC, partner (June 2016-
        present).

10.  Government experience (list any current and former advisory, 
consultative, honorary, or other part-time service or positions with 
Federal, State, or local governments held since college, including 
dates, other than those listed above):

        None.

11.  Business relationships (list all current and former positions held 
as an officer, director, trustee, partner (e.g., limited partner, non-
voting, etc.), proprietor, agent, representative, or consultant of any 
corporation, company, firm, partnership, other business enterprise, or 
educational or other institution):

        Picard, Kentz and Rowe LLP (partner).

12.  Memberships (list all current and former memberships, as well as 
any current and former offices held in professional, fraternal, 
scholarly, civic, business, charitable, and other organizations dating 
back to college, including dates for these memberships and offices):

        DC Bar Association, Washington, DC (2007-present): I do not 
        serve in any leadership role or participate beyond my dues.

        New York Bar Association, Albany, NY (2006-2011): I did not 
        serve in any leadership role or participate beyond my dues.

        U.S. Court of International Trade, New York, NY (2007-present): 
        I practice before this court.

        U.S. Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit, Washington, DC 
        (2007-present): I practice before this court.

        Georgetown University Law Center International Trade Update 
        (2019-present): I serve on the Advisory Panel for this annual 
        update for trade law practitioners and law students. I am not 
        compensated for this role.

        Customs and International Trade Bar Association, Washington, DC 
        (``CITBA'') (2007-2011, with some lapses): I did not serve in 
        any leadership role. I was a panelist for one of the panels at 
        the annual CITBA conference in 2019 discussing issues related 
        to the scope of antidumping and countervailing duty orders.

        Women in International Trade, Washington, DC (2006-2011): I did 
        not serve in any leadership role. I attended panels and other 
        professional development events sponsored by the association, 
        and cowrote an article for the association's seasonal 
        newsletter.

        Lighthouse Club, Lewes, DE (June 2021-present): my husband and 
        I are members of this association. We do not serve in any 
        leadership role or participate beyond the monthly dues. This is 
        the homeowners' association that manages the pools and 
        clubhouse for the community where I recently purchased a 
        vacation townhome.

        Asian Pacific American Law Students Association, Georgetown 
        University Law Center, Washington, DC (2003-2006): I was the 
        Academic Chair for the academic year of 2004 to 2005.

        Georgetown Journal of Law and Public Policy (2004-2006): I did 
        not serve in any leadership role in this organization.

        Asian Pacific American Legal Resource Center, Georgetown 
        University Law Center, Washington, DC (2005-2006): I did not 
        serve in any leadership role in this organization.

        Asian Pacific Americans for Action (``APAA''), Cornell 
        University, Ithaca, NY (1999-2002): I was the co-president of 
        APAA from September 2000 through May 2002.

        National Society of Collegiate Scholars, Cornell University, 
        Ithaca, NY (2001-2002): I did not serve in any leadership role 
        in this organization.

        Kappa Omicron Nu Honor Society, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 
        (2001-2002): I did not serve in any leadership role in this 
        organization.

13.  Political affiliations and activities:

        a.  List all public offices for which you have been a candidate 
        dating back to the age of 18.

       None.

        b.  List all memberships and offices held in and services 
        rendered to all political parties or election committees, 
        currently and during the last 10 years prior to the date of 
        your nomination.

       None.

        c.  Itemize all political contributions to any individual, 
        campaign organization, political party, political action 
        committee, or similar entity of $50 or more for the past 10 
        years prior to the date of your nomination.

       Gina Ortiz Jones (D): $250 on 10/15/2020.

       Jon Ossoff (D): $44.00 on 11/5/2020.

       Barbara Bollier (D): $150 on 9/28/2020.

       Raphael Warnock (D): $100 on 11/8/2020.

14.  Honors and awards (list all scholarships, fellowships, honorary 
degrees, honorary society memberships, military medals, and any other 
special recognitions for outstanding service or achievement received 
since the age of 18):

        Commerce 2011 Distinguished Performance Bronze Medal Award.

        U.S. Embassy Beijing 2009 Franklin Award.

        2004 CALI Excellence for the Future Award in International 
        Trade.

15.  Published writings (list the titles, publishers, dates, and 
hyperlinks (as applicable) of all books, articles, reports, blog posts, 
or other published materials you have written):

        Co-author, ``Using AD and CVD Laws to Address Unfair Labor 
        Practices,'' Picard, Kentz and Rowe LLP blog post, https://
        pkrllp.com/antidumping/using-ad-and-cvd-laws-to-address-unfair-
        labor-practices/.

        Co-author, ``Foreign Investment and National Security,'' China 
        Business Review, Vol. 35, No. 1, pp. 51-53 (January/February 
        2008).

        Co-author, ``Food Safety Reform: What the FDA Can Learn From 
        Other Major Importing Countries,'' Women in International Trade 
        Newsletter (Fall 2007).

        Co-author, ``Foreign Sanctions Countermeasures and Other 
        Responses to U.S. Extraterritorial Sanctions,'' USA*Engage and 
        the National Foreign Trade Council (August 2007), https://
        www.nftc.org/default/usa%20engage/Foreign%20
        Sanctions%20Countermeasures%20Study.pdf.

        Author, ``The Privacy Rule: HIPAA Standards for the Privacy of 
        Individually Identifiable Health Information,'' 27 Employee 
        Benefits Journal 3, 59 (September 2002), https://
        pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/12219566/ (abstract).

16.  Speeches (list all formal speeches and presentations (e.g., 
PowerPoint) you have delivered during the past 5 years which are on 
topics relevant to the position for which you have been nominated, 
including dates):

        Panelist, ``Scope: Endgame,'' 20th Judicial Conference of the 
        U.S. Court of International Trade (2019).

        Panelist, ``International Trade Update,'' Case Western 
        University School of Law (2019).

17.  Qualifications (state what, in your opinion, qualifies you to 
serve in the position to which you have been nominated):

        The Assistant Secretary for Enforcement and Compliance within 
        Commerce's International Trade Administration is responsible 
        for administering and enforcing title VII of the Tariff Act of 
        1930, as amended, which includes U.S. antidumping (``AD''), 
        countervailing duty (``CVD''), safeguard, and other trade 
        remedy laws. I have over 15 years of experience in the practice 
        of title VII trade remedy law, particularly in the area of AD/
        CVD law. I started my law career in Dewey Ballantine LLP's 
        international trade group. During my employment at the U.S. 
        embassy in Beijing, China, one of my responsibilities was 
        defending the U.S. Government in China's CVD investigations 
        against U.S. products, including U.S. chicken broiler exports 
        and U.S. specialty steel exports. I also counseled U.S. 
        companies doing business in China dealing with Chinese trade 
        barriers.

        While at the Office of the U.S. Trade Representative's Office 
        of General Counsel, I led the U.S. delegation in our successful 
        defense of Pub. L. 112-99 (i.e., the GPX legislation) against 
        China's challenge before the WTO Appellate Body. The GPX 
        legislation allowed for the concurrent application of AD and 
        CVD laws to non-market economies, such as China and Vietnam. 
        During my tenure at the U.S. Department of Commerce's Chief 
        Counsel for Trade Enforcement and Compliance, I similarly 
        defended Commerce's AD and CVD determinations before the U.S. 
        Court of International Trade and U.S. Court of Appeals for the 
        Federal Circuit. Finally, at my current position as partner at 
        Picard, Kentz and Rowe LLP, I represent U.S. industries in AD, 
        CVD, and injury proceedings. Given my depth of knowledge of the 
        title VII trade laws and previous government experience 
        defending the United States' administration and enforcement of 
        these laws, I believe I am well qualified for the position of 
        Assistant Secretary for Enforcement and Compliance.

                   B. FUTURE EMPLOYMENT RELATIONSHIPS

 1.  Will you sever all connections (including participation in future 
benefit arrangements) with your present employers, business firms, 
associations, or organizations if you are confirmed by the Senate? If 
not, provide details.

        Yes.

 2.  Do you have any plans, commitments, or agreements to pursue 
outside employment, with or without compensation, during your service 
with the government? If so, provide details.

        No.

 3.  Has any person or entity made a commitment or agreement to employ 
your services in any capacity after you leave government service? If 
so, provide details.

        No.

 4.  If you are confirmed by the Senate, do you expect to serve out 
your full term or until the next presidential election, whichever is 
applicable? If not, explain.

        Yes.

                   C. POTENTIAL CONFLICTS OF INTEREST

 1.  Indicate any current and former investments, obligations, 
liabilities, or other personal relationships, including spousal or 
family employment, which could involve potential conflicts of interest 
in the position to which you have been nominated.

        Any potential conflict of interest will be resolved in 
        accordance with the terms of my ethics agreement, which was 
        developed in consultation with ethics officials at the 
        Department of Commerce and the Office of Government Ethics. I 
        understand that my ethics agreement has been provided to the 
        committee. I am not aware of any potential conflict other than 
        those addressed by my ethics agreement.

 2.  Describe any business relationship, dealing, or financial 
transaction which you have had during the last 10 years (prior to the 
date of your nomination), whether for yourself, on behalf of a client, 
or acting as an agent, that could in any way constitute or result in a 
possible conflict of interest in the position to which you have been 
nominated.

        Any potential conflict of interest will be resolved in 
        accordance with the terms of my ethics agreement, which was 
        developed in consultation with ethics officials at the 
        Department of Commerce and the Office of Government Ethics. I 
        understand that my ethics agreement has been provided to the 
        committee. I am not aware of any potential conflict other than 
        those addressed by my ethics agreement.

 3.  Describe any activity during the past 10 years (prior to the date 
of your nomination) in which you have engaged for the purpose of 
directly or indirectly influencing the passage, defeat, or modification 
of any legislation or affecting the administration and execution of law 
or public policy. Activities performed as an employee of the Federal 
Government need not be listed.

        No.

 4.  Explain how you will resolve any potential conflict of interest, 
including any that are disclosed by your responses to the above items. 
(Provide the committee with two copies of any trust or other 
agreements.)

        Any potential conflict will be resolved in accordance with the 
        terms of my ethics agreement.

 5.  Two copies of written opinions should be provided directly to the 
committee by the designated agency ethics officer of the agency to 
which you have been nominated and by the Office of Government Ethics 
concerning potential conflicts of interest or any legal impediments to 
your serving in this position.

        To be provided by the agency.

                       D. LEGAL AND OTHER MATTERS

 1.  Have you ever been the subject of a complaint or been 
investigated, disciplined, or otherwise cited for a breach of ethics 
for unprofessional conduct before any court, administrative agency 
(e.g.. an Inspector General's office), professional association, 
disciplinary committee, or other ethics enforcement entity at any time? 
Have you ever been interviewed regarding your own conduct as part of 
any such inquiry or investigation? If so, provide details, regardless 
of the outcome.

        No.

 2.  Have you ever been investigated, arrested, charged, or held by any 
Federal, State, or other law enforcement authority for a violation of 
any Federal, State, county, or municipal law, regulation, or ordinance, 
other than a minor traffic offense? Have you ever been interviewed 
regarding your own conduct as part of any such inquiry or 
investigation? If so, provide details.

        No.

 3.  Have you ever been involved as a party in interest in any 
administrative agency proceeding or civil litigation? If so, provide 
details.

        No.

 4.  Have you ever been convicted (including pleas of guilty or nolo 
contendere) of any criminal violation other than a minor traffic 
offense? If so, provide details.

        No.

 5.  Please advise the committee of any additional information, 
favorable or unfavorable, which you feel should be considered in 
connection with your nomination.

        No additional information.

                     E. TESTIFYING BEFORE CONGRESS

 1.  If you are confirmed by the Senate, are you willing to appear and 
testify before any duly constituted committee of the Congress on such 
occasions as you may be reasonably requested to do so?

        Yes.

 2.  If you are confirmed by the Senate, are you willing to provide 
such information as is requested by such committees?

        Yes.

                                 ______
                                 
           Questions Submitted for the Record to Lisa W. Wang
                 Questions Submitted by Hon. Ron Wyden
                         china and trade cheats
    Question. Here in the Senate, the Finance Committee writes the 
trade rules that are intended to crack down on all manner of trade 
cheating--dumping, subsidizing, and circumventing U.S. law. But we need 
a strong partnership with you to enforce those rules as written, and to 
understand what else is needed to put American businesses on a level 
playing field with firms and countries intent on hollowing out our 
manufacturing base.

    In particular, China has been clear about its intent to use 
subsidization, vertical integration, and every other tactic imaginable 
to move entire supply chains to China--allowing China to control 
significant chunks of the global economy.

    I have a two-part question:

    First, if confirmed, can you tell me how you will position your 
office to be more nimble in responding to China's industrial policies 
before American businesses are irreparably harmed?

    Answer. The primary mission of Enforcement and Compliance (E&C) is 
enforcement of the trade remedy laws which are designed to provide 
remedial measures for U.S. industry and workers who have been injured 
by unfair trade practices, including unfair subsidization. These are 
often a major component of China's market-distorting policies. If 
confirmed, I will be vigilant in pursuing circumvention and evasion in 
order to maintain the integrity of our affirmative investigations and 
determinations regarding market-distorting behavior that results in 
unfair trade and to ensure that much-needed remedies for our industry 
and workers are not undermined. Further, if confirmed, I will promote 
working with like-minded trading partners in using tools, including 
through market-correcting measures such as trade remedies, as well as 
working closely with our CBP counterparts to address evasion and fraud.

    Question. Second, will you work with me and my staff to understand 
what additional authority Commerce needs to address the broad 
industrial cheating that threatens U.S. jobs?

    Answer. Yes. If confirmed, I look forward to working with you and 
your staff on this issue.

                       trade agreement compliance
    Question. In addition to ensuring enforcement of U.S. antidumping 
and countervailing duty law, if confirmed, you would be responsible for 
helping U.S. companies break through foreign trade barriers by 
demanding compliance with international trade rules.

    As Oregonians are well aware, it is not enough to have a lengthy 
trade agreement and a fancy signing ceremony. Agreements--like the 
USMCA--need to be enforced so that U.S. businesses and workers get what 
was bargained for on issues like market access, labor, and the 
environment.

    As head of Enforcement and Compliance, you are responsible for 
working directly with U.S. businesses and foreign governments to ensure 
trade agreement obligations are met and barriers to trade are brought 
down. This work is critical as it ensures U.S. workers, farmers, 
ranchers and others can fairly access markets for their goods and grow 
their businesses.

    If confirmed, how would you work to ensure American workers, 
farmers, and ranchers are getting what they bargained for in our trade 
agreements?

    Answer. If confirmed, I will work tirelessly to ensure our trading 
partners comply with their obligations under U.S. trade agreements. All 
American workers, farmers, and ranchers are entitled to the 
transparency, predictability, and fairness that our agreements 
guarantee, whether they are multilateral via the WTO, regional (such as 
in USMCA), or bilateral. Enforcement and Compliance (E&C) is 
responsible for monitoring trade agreement operation and when non-
compliance is identified, leveraging all available U.S. Government 
tools to ensure foreign governments honor their obligations. To fulfill 
this mission, E&C collaborates extensively with the Office of the 
United States Trade Representative and other agencies, as well as 
regularly engages with U.S. stakeholders, including operating the ITA 
portal for U.S. businesses to register complaints about trade problems.

                                 ______
                                 
               Questions Submitted by Hon. Maria Cantwell
    Question. China is no doubt one of our most important trading 
partners and was the third largest export market for American products 
last year. In 2020, we exported $26.5 billion worth of agricultural 
products and $40.4 billion worth of service goods to China.

    My home State of Washington is a major exporter to China as well, 
exporting $9 billion worth of goods in 2020, making China Washington 
State's largest trading partner. The agreements outlined in the China 
Phase One purchasing agreement would benefit Washington State's 
economy. That being said, reports have shown that China is not on track 
to meet its purchasing targets. China is Washington State's third 
largest trading partner for agricultural products. In 2020, Washington 
State exported $518 million worth of agricultural goods to China. Top 
Washington State agricultural exports include $83 million worth of fish 
and seafood, $54 million worth of frozen potatoes, $51 million worth of 
cherries, $25 million worth of wheat, and $13 million worth of beef.

    China should have purchased $29.8 billion worth of agricultural 
products by the end of September to meet the target, but instead fell 
short at purchasing only $26.7 billion worth. The agreement was 
supposed to offset some of the effects of the trade conflict, so we 
need to ensure that China is on track to achieve the targets that they 
agreed to.

    USTR Ambassador Tai also agreed during her speech on the 
administration's China trade policy that we must hold China accountable 
to their commitments, and that certain provisions in the phase one 
agreement will need to be revisited.

    In your opinion, what can be done to improve China's performance in 
terms of the purchasing targets that they agreed to?

    Are the goals of the agreement realistic? Are there areas of the 
agreement that you think need to be reassessed or renegotiated?

    How do you plan to work with USTR to enforce the targets of the 
agreement without imposing economic harm to U.S. industries?

    Answer. I believe we must hold the Chinese Government accountable 
to their commitments and we must have the necessary tools to address 
these challenges. USTR is leading the negotiations with respect to the 
Chinese Government's commitments under the Phase One agreement. If 
confirmed, I look forward to working with my colleagues at ITA and with 
USTR on these issues, as appropriate. I will work to ensure countries 
live up to their commitments and ensure workers and businesses can 
compete on a level playing field.

                                 ______
                                 
                 Questions Submitted by Hon. Todd Young
    Question. Understanding and advocating for American enterprises is 
a key responsibility as Assistant Secretary of Commerce for Enforcement 
and Compliance. For years, Hoosier businesses in Indiana have been 
confronted with major barriers to market access, particularly at the 
hands of China, and are often pressed to make trade-related 
concessions. For instance, businesses are forced to entertain 
outrageous demands like surrendering intellectual property or 
technology in exchange for access to Chinese markets. These moves are 
designed to benefit China's state-owned enterprises while keeping U.S. 
manufacturers at a disadvantage.

    If confirmed, how do you plan to address repeated offenses by China 
to limit market access for American businesses?

    What is your initial strategy to jumpstart engagement with American 
stakeholders?

    Answer. The Chinese Government engages in a range of unfair 
economic practices that include forced technology transfer, barriers to 
market access, as well as theft of intellectual property. These 
anticompetitive activities harm American workers and businesses and 
undermine the competitiveness of U.S. firms and workers.

    It is critical that trade policies and programs reflect the needs 
of U.S. firms and workers since they are the engine of economic growth 
in the United States. In working on these issues, I will keep U.S. 
workers and businesses front of mind. With respect to engagement, if 
confirmed, I intend to utilize ITA's broad network of experts and 
offices around the country to engage with stakeholders and the business 
community. I am committed to working with the interagency, including 
USTR and CBP, to address these issues, as well as with Congress, you, 
and your staff.

    Question. Digital trade affects nearly every company with an 
international presence, and refers broadly to policies related to 
everything from data flows to smart manufacturing. American businesses 
can be successful if our international partners adhere to rules of the 
road. Stealing intellectual property, forcing data transfer in exchange 
for market access, censorship as a means of economic coercion--these 
are all actions that should not be tolerated.

    How can the U.S. hold our trading partners accountable with regard 
to digital trade? Do you believe upholding digital trade integrity is a 
vital part of our economic health and success?

    I am working on a resolution to support key digital trade 
provisions in any future trade discussions or negotiations. Do you 
think there is value in this effort?

    Answer. Digital trade is an important part of the Nation's economic 
health and success. If confirmed, I am committed to holding our trading 
partners accountable when they violate our laws and trade commitments, 
including through monitoring, identifying, and resolving trade 
barriers. If confirmed, I will work with Commerce staff, and when 
appropriate the Office of the United States Trade Representative, which 
has primary jurisdiction over trade policy, on these issues. This 
includes expeditiously addressing non-compliance matters and referrals 
for dispute settlement, as needed. If confirmed, I look forward to 
working with you and your staff on this important issue.

                                 ______
                                 
                 Prepared Statement of Hon. Ron Wyden, 
                       a U.S. Senator From Oregon
    The Finance Committee meets this morning to discuss two important 
nominations for President Biden's trade policy team at the Commerce 
Department.

    First, Marisa Lago is nominated to serve as Under Secretary of 
Commerce for International Trade. This role is all about being the 
point person for trade policy at the Commerce Department, heading up 
the International Trade Administration. It deals with enforcing our 
trade laws to protect American jobs, breaking down barriers to 
American-made exports, and getting small and medium-sized businesses 
into the trade policy winners' circle. It's a wide-ranging job, but 
that's why President Biden nominated somebody with a vast array of 
experience in a lot of different leadership roles in public service.

    Ms. Lago served during the Obama administration as Assistant 
Secretary for International Markets and Development at the Treasury 
Department. She previously led the Office of International Affairs for 
the Securities and Exchange Commission. She was a top economic 
development official for New York State and the city of Boston.

    Most recently, she served as the Director of the NYC Department of 
City Planning and Chair of the City Planning Commission. I'm confident 
in her experience, and I'm confident in her ability to lead a large 
team working on big economic challenges.

    Next, Lisa Wang is nominated to serve as Assistant Secretary of 
Commerce for Enforcement and Compliance. This role is all about using 
some of our strongest tools for protecting American jobs and businesses 
against trade ripoffs. That includes investigating and addressing 
dumping by foreign companies and unfair government subsidies. The 
Enforcement and Compliance office also works closely with USTR on key 
trade enforcement issues.

    Ms. Wang previously served as a senior attorney in the Office of 
the Chief Counsel for Trade Enforcement and Compliance at the Commerce 
Department. She also served as Assistant General Counsel in the Office 
of the U.S. Trade Representative and has experience in private 
practice. The bottom line is, she is a specialist in these areas of 
trade law dealing with enforcement and compliance, and she's exactly 
the right person for this job.

    This committee takes a special interest in what I call getting 
trade done right. It's about fighting for American jobs, businesses, 
farmers, and ranchers by strongly enforcing trade laws and creating new 
opportunities to sell American-made goods and services around the 
world. President Biden is assembling a top-notch team for getting trade 
done right. Ms. Lago and Ms. Wang will be excellent additions to that 
team. I want to congratulate them on their nominations, and I'm looking 
forward to our discussion.

                                   



