
 - GAO'S 2023 HIGH RISK LIST: RECOMMENDATIONS FOR REDUCING WASTE, FRAUD, AND ABUSE

[Senate Hearing 118-67]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]


                                                       S. Hrg. 118-67

               GAO'S 2023 HIGH RISK LIST: RECOMMENDATIONS 
                 FOR REDUCING WASTE, FRAUD, AND ABUSE

=======================================================================

                                HEARING

                               BEFORE THE

                              COMMITTEE ON
               HOMELAND SECURITY AND GOVERNMENTAL AFFAIRS
                          UNITED STATES SENATE

                    ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS


                             FIRST SESSION

                               __________

                             APRIL 20, 2023

                               __________

        Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov
        
                       Printed for the use of the
        Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs
        
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]


                                
                    U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE                    
52-783 PDF                 WASHINGTON : 2023                    
          
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

        COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY AND GOVERNMENTAL AFFAIRS

                   GARY C. PETERS, Michigan, Chairman
THOMAS R. CARPER, Delaware           RAND PAUL, Kentucky
MAGGIE HASSAN, New Hampshire         RON JOHNSON, Wisconsin
KYRSTEN SINEMA, Arizona              JAMES LANKFORD, Oklahoma
JACKY ROSEN, Nevada                  MITT ROMNEY, Utah
ALEX PADILLA, California             RICK SCOTT, Florida
JON OSSOFF, Georgia                  JOSH HAWLEY, Missouri
RICHARD BLUMENTHAL, Connecticut      ROGER MARSHALL, Kansas

                   David M. Weinberg, Staff Director
                    Zachary I. Schram, Chief Counsel
            Lena C. Chang, Director of Governmental Affairs
               Emily I. Manna, Professional Staff Member
                Carter A. Hirschhorn, Research Assistant
           William E. Henderson III, Minority Staff Director
              Christina N. Salazar, Minority Chief Counsel
            Quinton A. Brady, Minority Investigative Counsel
                  Andrew J. Hopkins, Minority Counsel
                     Laura W. Kilbride, Chief Clerk
                   Ashley A. Gonzalez, Hearing Clerk

                            C O N T E N T S

                                 ------                                
Opening statements:
                                                                   Page
    Senator Peters...............................................     1
    Senator Paul.................................................     3
    Senator Carper...............................................    12
    Senator Lankford.............................................    15
    Senator Rosen................................................    18
    Senator Hassan...............................................    20
    Senator Scott................................................    23
    Senator Blumenthal...........................................    24
    Senator Ossoff...............................................    28
Prepared statements:
    Senator Peters...............................................    33
    Senator Paul.................................................    36

                               WITNESSES
                        Thursday, April 20, 2023

Hon. Eugene L. Dodaro, Comptroller General of the United States, 
  U.S. Government Accountability Office
    Testimony....................................................     5
    Prepared statement...........................................    38

                                APPENDIX

Senator Paul's chart.............................................    58
Responses to post-hearing questions for the Record:
    Mr. Dodaro...................................................    59

 
                       GAO'S 2023 HIGH RISK LIST:
          RECOMMENDATIONS FOR REDUCING WASTE, FRAUD, AND ABUSE

                              ----------                              


                        Thursday, April 20, 2023

                                     U.S. Senate,  
                           Committee on Homeland Security  
                                  and Governmental Affairs,
                                                    Washington, DC.
    The Committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10 a.m., in room 
SD-562, Senate Dirksen Office Building, Hon. Gary Peters, 
chairman of the committee, presiding.
    Present: Senators Peters [presiding], Carper, Hassan, 
Sinema, Rosen, Ossoff, Paul, Johnson, Lankford, Romney, Scott, 
and Hawley.

             OPENING STATEMENT OF SENATOR PETERS\1\

    Chairman Peters. The Committee will come to order.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \1\ The prepared statement of Senator Peters appear in the Appendix 
on page 33.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    Today I would like to welcome Comptroller General Gene 
Dodaro to the Committee, and thank you for your years of 
service to the American people.
    The Government Accountability Office (GAO) is an 
independent, non-partisan ``congressional watchdog,'' charged 
with examining how taxpayer dollars are spent and evaluating 
whether government is working efficiently and effectively for 
the American people.
    For over 30 years, GAO has reported on ``high risk'' 
government programs and operations at the start of each 
Congress. The High Risk List identifies government programs 
that are vulnerable to fraud, waste, abuse, and mismanagement 
or need reforms to improve them.
    The High Risk List and GAO's important oversight work have 
been vital resources for this Committee to identify problems 
and work on bipartisan legislation to improve the way the 
Federal Government works each and every day, and I hope we will 
continue those efforts in this Congress.
    Over the past 17 years, by addressing many of the concerns 
highlighted on the High Risk List, Congress and Federal 
agencies have saved hardworking Americans more than $675 
billion in taxpayer dollars. I am grateful to GAO for their 
efforts to identify these areas for improvement and for their 
continued commitment to ensuring the government functions in 
the best interest of taxpayers.
    Just within the last two years, the Federal Government has 
seen an estimated $100 billion in financial benefits due to 
improvements in high-risk areas noted in GAO's 2021 High Risk 
Report, and 16 out of 34 high-risk areas have made 
improvements, the most since GAO began assessing high-risk 
areas.
    For example, a 2016 law that I authored, the Making 
Electronic Government Accountable By Yielding Tangible 
Efficiencies Act (MEGABYTE Act), which was based on a GAO 
recommendation to improve software license management, has 
saved taxpayers more than $450 million by reducing duplicative 
software purchases. I have reintroduced bipartisan legislation 
this Congress to continue building on that success by improving 
how the Federal Government manages software purchases, and will 
continue working to address other high-risk areas highlighted 
in GAO's report.
    This year, GAO has placed our nation's cybersecurity as one 
of the top five high-risk areas that need significant 
attention, and has issued more than 4,000 recommendations in 
the cybersecurity domain since 2010.
    Strengthening our nation's cybersecurity has been a top 
priority for this Committee, and we moved several bills last 
Congress that I authored to shore up our nation's cybersecurity 
defenses, including legislation to require critical 
infrastructure owners and operators to report when they have 
been attacked or they have paid a ransom.
    This is an important step toward safeguarding some of the 
most frequent targets of cyberattacks, but it is clear we must 
continue working to address this issue as the threats from 
cyberattacks continue to grow.
    GAO has also highlighted challenges with hiring skilled 
cybersecurity and artificial intelligence (AI) experts to fill 
roles in the Federal Government. If we are going to be truly 
effective at strengthening our networks, leading the world in 
these fast-growing areas, and protecting our national security, 
then we must have qualified and dedicated cybersecurity, 
information technology (IT), and AI experts working across the 
Federal Government.
    I have also authored legislation to address these skill 
gaps to ensure we can fill these in-demand roles in the 
cybersecurity and artificial intelligence fields, and will 
continue working with my colleagues in a bipartisan way to 
build a strong talent pipeline for the Federal Government.
    The latest High Risk List also includes the need to address 
toxic substances, including Per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances 
(PFAS), also known as ``forever chemicals,'' that have 
contaminated communities in Michigan as well as all across the 
country.
    These chemicals can be found in our food, air, water, and 
consumer products, adversely affecting the health of millions 
of Americans. PFAS exposure remains a serious issue, and the 
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) must be able to 
accurately assess and monitor existing and emerging PFAS 
substances to determine whether they pose a harm to human 
health.
    I have pressed for the EPA and other agencies to increase 
cleanup efforts, and will continue conducting oversight to 
ensure agencies are detecting and responding to this threat in 
a timely manner.
    Finally, this year's list includes pandemic preparedness 
and response efforts. Last Congress, I released a report 
detailing the findings from a two-year investigation into the 
Federal Government's preparedness and initial response to the 
Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic. The investigation 
revealed serious systemic failures in our nation's ability to 
grapple with a pandemic of that scale, and my report made key 
recommendations to ensure we are better prepared for the next 
public health crisis. I will continue working on legislation to 
address these shortcomings and strengthen our ability to deal 
with future pandemics.
    Mr. Dodaro, we appreciate you for your independent, non-
partisan work that you and all of the dedicated employees at 
GAO have conducted and continue to conduct. I know last month, 
the Partnership for Public Service named GAO the Best Place to 
Work in the Federal Government for mid-sized agencies. 
Congratulations on that, a great honor.
    [Applause.]
    I will add it was the third year in a row. Now that is 
worthy of applause, three years in a row.
    With all of that I look forward to our discussion here.
    Ranking Member Paul, you are recognized for your opening 
comments.

              OPENING STATEMENT OF SENATOR PAUL\1\

    Senator Paul. Thank you. This Committee is long overdue for 
a hearing that focuses on the rampant waste, fraud, and abuse 
in the Federal Government. We are faced with a $31 trillion 
mountain of debt. Rather than attempt to get spending under 
control, though, both parties continue to propose new spending 
with no regard for the exploding debt or controlling the 
already existing spending.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \1\ The prepared statement of Senator Paul appears in the Appendix 
on page 36.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    To make matters worse, everyone in Congress knows that the 
plague of waste has infected just about every Federal agency. 
But rather than take steps to restore fiscal health, Congress 
buries its head in the sand, doles out more and more taxpayer 
money every year to the Executive Branch with no strings 
attached, crosses its fingers, and hopes the problem will fix 
itself.
    For years, I have documented outlandish spending in my 
annual ``Waste Report,'' which exposes how the Federal 
Government is misusing Americans' hard-earned tax dollars. My 
most recent report uncovered over $482 billion in government 
waste. For example, the National Institutes of Health (NIH) 
spent more than $1.1 million to get mice drunk--apparently we 
are not aware of what happens when you drink too much--$2.3 
million to inject six-month-old beagle puppies with cocaine--
apparently there is not enough evidence of what happens to 
humans on cocaine--$3 million to watch hamsters fight on 
steroids.
    This is the tip of the iceberg. This has been going on 
since the 1970s. Many of you will remember the studies to 
figure out what makes people happy. This stuff has been going 
on forever, and yet the agency that funds a lot of this, the 
National Science Foundation (NSF), we have doubled their budget 
in the last two years, and we think, oh well, they will be much 
better with waste and fraud with double the amount of money. It 
is my opinion the only way you ever rein in waste and fraud is 
give these agencies less money, and then they will be forced to 
make do on less money.
    Government watchdogs like the Government Accountability 
Office were created to expose and combat waste, fraud, abuse, 
and mismanagement in the Federal Government. Every two years, 
GAO publishes its own report that helps call out government 
misdeeds. The High Risk report is a compilation of government 
failures and vulnerabilities. It spotlights agencies and 
programs prone to waste, fraud, and abuse.
    One issue prominently featured in GAO's most recent high-
risk report is the governmentwide problem with improper 
payments. This has been listed in the past and is listed again 
this year. For example, in 2022, GAO found Medicare made $46.8 
billion in improper payments. Medicaid made $81 billion in 
improper payments, which should really not come as a surprise 
given the Medicaid program suspended enforcement of eligibility 
reviews during the COVID-19 pandemic. This has not been talked 
about much, but during the pandemic all the so-called rules for 
looking at abuse just went out the window and they said, oh 
well, everybody deserves Medicaid, everybody deserves food 
stamps, and nobody came off any of these programs. We just 
threw out all of the oversight of these programs, and as a 
consequence, they are in some of the worst state that they have 
been in in a long time.
    If that was not bad enough, GAO looks at the substantial 
levels of fraud that occurred in the Department of Labor's 
(DOL) Unemployment Insurance (UI) program and says it is almost 
impossible to even grapple with the problem because it is so 
big and so opaque.
    Like my own waste report, GAO also identified the 
Department of Defense (DOD) as a consistent perpetrator of 
waste, fraud, and abuse. Since 1995, GAO has identified 
Department of Defense's financial management as ``high-risk.'' 
Unfortunately, not much has changed since then, other than DOD 
receiving bigger and bigger checks every year. This is an 
example of how this is really a bipartisan problem, Republicans 
wanting unlimited checks for the Defense Department, Democrats 
wanting unlimited checks for the social welfare. Everything 
goes up and the oversight becomes less and less proficient or 
profound.
    Until the Department of Defense can properly account for 
the money it spends, though, Congress can never effectively 
conduct oversight of the department. The DOD has become a 
behemoth of spending, and no one here ever questions it.
    How does all this waste happen? A better question might be, 
how does all this waste continue to happen and get worse all 
the time? When I was a kid in the 1970s, William Proxmire, a 
conservative Democrat, used to give his Golden Fleece Awards 
for nonsensical government spending. But here we are, decades 
later, still facing the same problems. There was one study that 
they did in the last two years, I think it was over $1 million 
to study if you take selfies of yourself smiling and you look 
at these selfies later on in the day, whether or not you will 
be happier.
    The thing is, do you think that is going to get better if 
we give the National Science Foundation more money? We doubled 
their budget and they do more of this craziness, and every year 
we point it out and every year gets worse because no one is 
willing to call them on it and say, ``We are going to give you 
less money next year unless you are better with spending the 
money.''
    The Chairman, GAO identified numerous instances of waste, 
fraud, and abuse that Congress can easily address. I appreciate 
GAO's work, but what is really needed is congressional will to 
significantly reduce government waste and spending. The 
American people deserve an accountable government that manages 
their hard-earned dollars responsibly. Mr. Dodaro, thank you 
for being here today. I look forward to hearing your testimony 
and working with you to reduce the waste, fraud, and abuse 
identified in your report.
    Chairman Peters. Thank you, Ranking Member Paul.
    It is the practice of the Homeland Security and 
Governmental Affairs Committee (HSGAC) to swear in witnesses, 
so Mr. Dodaro, and our subject matter experts, I think that may 
becoming, there are a few that might be testifying in the 
question and answer (Q&A) process, if you would please all rise 
and raise your right hand.
    Do you swear that the testimony that you will give before 
this Committee will be the truth, the whole truth, and nothing 
but the truth, so help you, God?
    [Chorus of I dos.]
    Chairman Peters. You may be seated.
    Today's witness is Comptroller Gene Dodaro. Mr. Dodaro has 
served as the Comptroller General of the U.S. Government 
Accountability Office since 2010, following two years as the 
Acting Comptroller General.
    In his over 45 years of service at the GAO he has held a 
number of leadership positions, including Chief Operating 
Officer (COO) and head of GAO's Accounting and Information 
Management Division.
    Mr. Dodaro, welcome to the Committee once again. It is 
always great to see you. We enjoy hearing your testimony and 
enjoy working with you on these important issues. You may 
proceed with your opening remarks.

 TESTIMONY OF HON. EUGENE L. DODARO,\1\ COMPTROLLER GENERAL OF 
    THE UNITED STATES, U.S. GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTABILITY OFFICE

    Mr. Dodaro. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, Ranking 
Member Paul, Members of the Committee. It is a pleasure to be 
here. I appreciate all the kind words about GAO. We enjoy 
working with this Committee and other committees across the 
Congress to make our government more accountable, efficient, 
and effective.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \1\ The prepared statement of Hon. Dodaro appears in the Appendix 
on page 38.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    The basic story with this High-Risk Update is that there 
has been good progress in certain areas due to Congressional 
and Executive Branch actions, but there are still serious, very 
consequential problems that need to be addressed--that need 
greater attention from the Congress and the Executive Branch.
    On the progress side, Mr. Chairman, you pointed out 16 
areas improved, two to the point that we are removing them from 
the list. The first is the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation 
(PBGC) multiemployer pension program. Congress appropriated 
funds. That program was projected to be insolvent in 2026. Now 
the projected insolvency date has been pushed off several 
decades. The single employer program has also improved 
gradually and so PBGC projects a very low risk of insolvency 
for either program for the next 15 years. We are going to take 
them off the list. Now just because they come of the list, they 
are not out of sight, so we will still continue to monitor what 
is going on with those programs.
    We are also removing the 2020 Census. They were able to 
contain, for the first time, the growth in spending in the cost 
of the census. They successfully deployed an internet response 
option this last time, and they took all our recommendations 
and those of the Department of Homeland Security (DHS) to bring 
down cybersecurity risk to the census. We are taking them off. 
Again, we will continue to watch whether or not risk builds up 
toward the 2030 Census, and if so, we will add it back to the 
list.
    There has been progress in other areas. Congress provided 
stable funding, at least for the next five years, to the 
surface transportation area. It did not solve the problem long-
term so it is still on the list, but there was good progress.
    Congress passed the Postal Service Reform Act that 
eliminated some of the financial pressures on the U.S. Postal 
Service (USPS). But the Postal Service business model is still 
not viable in the future. It continues to lose money--and 
remains on the list as well.
    Congress passed legislation to support a number of programs 
that seek to build in climate resilience up front, so our high-
risk area of limiting the Federal Government's fiscal exposure 
by better managing and building resilience in up front was 
addressed.
    Congress has provided some additional resources to the 
Internal Revenue Service (IRS), which deals with our high-risk 
area of tax administration on that area.
    So good progress. Congress is to be commended for all the 
action that they have taken, as well as the Executive Branch, 
in implementing some of these reforms.
    We added three new areas to the High Risk List. One is the 
Department of Health and Human Services (HHSs) leadership and 
coordination in responding to public health emergencies. Over 
the last decade we have seen failure after failure to be 
adequately prepared, and most recently during the pandemic. 
Roles and responsibilities need to be better clarified and 
there needs to be better data--and better communication--that 
is consistent and clear to the public. I fear we are not any 
better prepared now for the next emergency than we were for the 
last one. I wanted to put it on the list to highlight it, so 
that it stays in the public eye and with the Congress and the 
Administration.
    We also added the Unemployment Insurance System. Here we 
have estimated that at a minimum, there was $60 billion of 
fraud. We are working on a higher-end estimate now. But due to 
the significant fraud and improper payments--which was 
occurring even before the pandemic, at a much less level--and 
the need to reform the State IT systems. IT systems at the 
State level are very archaic. They are not well positioned. The 
program is not really designed to meet the modern needs of our 
current evolving workforce.
    We also are adding the management of the Federal prison 
system. There have been problems in the Bureau of Prisons' 
(BOP) staffing, which has led to some concerns about inmate and 
staff safety, and about their efforts to evaluate programs that 
are intended to help deal with the recidivism issue. Programs 
have not been very well evaluated and improved in those areas.
    Now I would like to highlight a few of the other areas 
remaining on the list. One is cybersecurity. The Federal 
Government is still not operating at a pace commensurate with 
the evolving grave threat. This has been something I have been 
focused on for many years now. The National Strategy just came 
out, but there is not yet an implementation plan for the 
strategy. They promised to produce one. It needs to identify 
who is responsible for what, how much money is needed, and how 
to measure performance and improvements in those areas. 
Cybersecurity remains a grave threat to our economy and our 
national security, and it needs to be better addressed.
    Second is drug misuse. We added that to the High Risk List 
a few years ago. The latest 12-month statistics show over 
107,000 people died from overdoses. There have been problems 
now not only with fentanyl and opioids but with xylazine, which 
is a tranquilizer given to animals, being mixed with the 
fentanyl, which is causing even more severe problems. We need a 
national strategy--that needs to be completed and implemented 
successfully. We need more coordination with State and local 
governments, law enforcement, and health care providers--to 
deal with this issue.
    The last area I will mention is oversight--of medical 
products and device. The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) is 
still not in a good position to deal with potential drug 
shortages in the economy, and to provide oversight over foreign 
production of medical products. Whether it is pharmaceuticals 
or medical devices, most of what is consumed in the United 
States right now is produced in other countries. FDA has to 
have more of an effective strategy for the global supply chain, 
not just domestic production in the United States.
    We are committed to continuing to work on these high-risk 
areas, to make greater progress. They are all very important to 
public health and safety, our national security, and can save 
billions of additional dollars.
    I thank you for the opportunity to be here. I look forward 
to your questions.
    Chairman Peters. Thank you, Mr. Dodaro. Thank you for the 
testimony.
    Federal cybersecurity has been on the High Risk List for 
years, as you know, but as you have just testified to it 
remains in need of significant attention. In many ways it is 
becoming a bigger problem that requires even more attention 
than in the past.
    The Federal Information Security Modernization Act (FISMA), 
for example, the Federal oversight, has not been updated in 
almost a decade, and that was before Cybersecurity and 
Infrastructure Security Agency (CISA) or the National Cyber 
Director even existed, and yet we have not updated some key 
pieces of legislation.
    Last Congress, this Committee marked up legislation that I 
wrote relating to FISMA, and it passed with unanimous support, 
but it still has not gotten through the House. We are going to 
continue to work to make that happen, and we are going to 
continue to work in Congress in a bipartisan way to do that.
    But my question for you, sir, is you have been sounding the 
alarm on Federal cybersecurity for more than two decades now, 
and as we continue to work on this issue what do you believe 
are really the key things that we should be focusing on to make 
these improvements, going forward?
    Mr. Dodaro. There are four main areas and about 10 actions 
that we believe are absolutely critical. One is the development 
and successful execution of a national and global strategy to 
deal with this issue. I mentioned the current status of that. 
Supply chain issues need to be dealt with more effectively. We 
have done quite a bit of work on those areas. We need a better 
cyber workforce. There are not enough people in the workforce. 
They are not always deployed in the Federal Government in the 
greatest priorities.
    We also need to get ahead of emerging technologies. 
Artificial intelligence and quantum computing will dramatically 
increase the cybersecurity concerns. Quantum computing can 
break encryption methods that are currently being used. We need 
to get prepared for these things ahead of time, which is why I 
tried to raise this issue. I first put it on the list in 1997, 
to try to get action.
    Second, we have to get the Federal agencies to have more 
comprehensive, effective security programs. Most of the Federal 
agencies are rated by their Inspector Generals (IGs) as not 
having effective IT programs. That is why FISMA reform is, in 
fact, needed, and we look forward, hopefully, that it will 
pass. We also need to have better incident responses when 
things do happen, and they will happen, that the agencies need 
to get on them right away, deal with them, limit the damage, 
and do assessments going forward.
    The third area, which I believe is one of the most 
important, is critical infrastructure protection. I do not 
think the Federal Government knows the preparedness of many of 
these important sectors of our economy as much as they should, 
in terms of the electricity grid, the communications networks, 
the financial markets, and many other areas. There needs to be 
much more partnership between the Federal Government and the 
private sector in this area, if we are going to really have 
successful activities. Right now it reminds me of the situation 
before September 11, 2001 (9/11), where a lot of people had 
information but it was not being shared with one another.
    Last, privacy laws need to be desperately updated. The 
Privacy Act was passed in 1974. There have been some minor 
improvements with more recent legislation, but it really does 
not meet the needs of the private sector or well serve the 
American people.
    Chairman Peters. I want to pick up on critical 
infrastructure. In your report you noted that six out of the 
nine sector risk management agencies need to better measure how 
critical infrastructure entities are actually addressing the 
cybersecurity risk, as you alluded to there in your last 
answer. You have also recommended that CISA establish 
milestones and timelines to help sector risk management 
agencies carry out their responsibilities.
    My question for you is, sir, in your view are sector risk 
management agencies resourced and organized to handle their 
responsibilities, or is there something else we should be 
thinking about?
    Mr. Dodaro. There needs to be more work to have them better 
organized and resourced. On the resource side, it is 
considered, in many cases, to be a corollary duty to their 
normal responsibilities, so they are really not dedicated to 
this effort. There is not a lot of focus on how to make 
improvements and measure whether or not the efforts that they 
are taking with the private sector are really improving the 
profile in those areas.
    Both on the organizational level and on the resource level 
the government is not where it should be, if we really are 
serious about managing the threat in this area and trying to 
work cooperatively with the private sector. I know there is a 
lot of reluctance to share information between the private 
sector and the government. We need to overcome that if we are 
going to, as a Nation, have a comprehensive approach. There 
needs to be some compromise on requirements. I know there is 
resistance to a lot of regulation, and I am not advocating 
that, but we need to get more serious and have some more 
compromises. Where there is a Federal regulatory role we should 
use it properly.
    Chairman Peters. Mr. Dodaro, the Toxic Substances Control 
Act provides EPA with the authority to review chemicals already 
in commerce, to keep the public safe, as you are well aware. 
However, there are thousands of PFAS chemicals still in use 
that have not yet been fully evaluated by the EPA.
    In your opinion, what steps does the EPA need to take to 
ensure that it can efficiently and effectively review PFAS 
chemicals to keep the American public safe?
    Mr. Dodaro. EPA has come up with a national testing 
strategy, which is a good first step. They have also 
established the first proposed rule for regulating certain 
PFASs in drinking water, which is a good step forward. But our 
observation is they are not resourced properly. They are way 
behind, and they do not have both the type of technical people 
in specialty areas as well as the quantity of people necessary 
to deal with the proliferation of these chemicals throughout 
our environment.
    That has been the biggest area that has been a problem, and 
I think Congress needs to focus on that. I am not advocating 
giving them resources without accountability. They need to have 
resources, but they need to produce and use those resources 
effectively.
    Chairman Peters. Thank you. I was happy to see that the 
2020 Census was removed from GAO's High Risk List, and I 
appreciate the work that the GAO did to provide key oversight 
during that process. However, I think we should learn from some 
of the problems that occurred in the last census, and it is 
really critical that we do that. One item in particular was the 
undercount of many populations, including in the city of 
Detroit, and we need to address this problem going forward. 
That has a significant impact on a local area, as you know. The 
Bureau must incorporate lessons learned in the 2030 Census 
planning process as it is ramping up.
    I just quickly, in the time here, will you commit to 
continuing the oversight of the Census Bureau? Even though it 
is off this list it is still going to require some pretty close 
oversight.
    Mr. Dodaro. Absolutely. One of my earlier assignments at 
GAO was looking at preparations for the 1990 Census, and we 
have followed every decennial since, and we will continue to do 
so.
    Chairman Peters. Good. I appreciate that.
    Ranking Member Paul, you are recognized for your questions.
    Senator Paul. Thank you, and welcome. I am very impressed 
with your work through the years, and continue to be amazed at 
some of it. In fact, you are able to get information that we 
are not able to get. We have such great resistance from 
Executive Branch, of either party, that everything is hidden 
from the people's representatives and from the people.
    Recently you were commissioned to look at spending through 
our agencies that has gone to China, and you found that there 
was $48 million that you can locate so far that went to China. 
But what was extraordinary, and still is extraordinary, I think 
has not really fully been recognized, is that you actually 
discovered that money was going from American universities and 
being subcontracted to military research in China. People would 
be kind of amazed that we are actually funding research in 
China, since we have such an adversarial relationship, but we 
are actually funding military research.
    There is an Academy of Military Medical Sciences (AMMS), 
and I think you publicly identified at least two of the 
universities with subgrants there, Duke and UC Berkeley. We 
have people thinking there may be as many six or seven other 
universities that are subcontracting this--UC Davis, UTMB 
Galveston, University of Wisconsin Madison, University of North 
Carolina, and University of Minnesota--and I would like to hear 
your response if you know any more about it, but also to look 
into those, because I think there is a question of whether it 
is being done appropriately, honestly, and actually, frankly, 
legally.
    Are you aware of any other universities that you can tell 
us that are subcontracting grants to China?
    Mr. Dodaro. Not offhand. I will talk to our team, and if we 
do have something I will submit it for the record.
    Part of the problem is there could be an award to a 
university, and sub awards from the universities to different 
areas, and it can go even a little further than that, and it is 
hard to track the sub awards.
    We are looking at that now. We are also looking at the 
Federal Government's coordination of research in international 
areas. We have a separate effort to look at that right now.
    Senator Paul. In looking at these subcontracts are you 
looking at whether or not they are obeying the law, the rules 
as to how you are allowed to subcontract it? Do you look at the 
False Claims Act, or are you looking at legality as well as 
good policy?
    Mr. Dodaro. We are looking at how the agencies are 
structuring the awards, and what kind of requirements they 
have. I have a little concern, in some of the preliminary 
briefings I have heard, that the Federal Government is not 
striking these agreements in a way that protects the Federal 
Government's interests as appropriately as possible.
    Senator Paul. Basically everything we know, we have learned 
some from the GAO, and almost everything else we know is from 
Freedom of Information Act (FOIA). The agencies will give us 
nothing. Recently we voted unanimously to declassify all of the 
COVID origins material, to give it to us. That does not mean 
they will give it to us. We have been asking for declassified 
information for two years and we get squat.
    In fact, from Freedom of Information Act we have two people 
at Defense Threat Reduction Agency (DTRA) and the Department of 
Defense, they are talking to each other, and they are saying, 
well, we are reviewing EcoHealth but it looks like EcoHealth is 
doing things with dollars beyond the definition of what they 
are supposed to be doing. The lead researcher at DTRA writes 
back and says, ``We probably should change the wording because 
if someone ever FOIAs that, that is not going to look good.'' 
Can you imagine these people?
    They also have exchanges going back and forth saying, 
``Senator Paul has requested this but he is doing it by himself 
because we cannot get a Democrat to help us, and so we are not 
going to give it to him.'' They actually are discussing that.
    Anything you can do, I trust your honesty, your integrity, 
and that you will try. We need your help, because government is 
so out of control that we cannot get information.
    We complain about the Chinese government. We cannot get 
information from our own government. We now have unanimously 
passed to declassify things, and they are still holding on to 
all the information. They will not give it up. We are still 
wrangling. We have not yet gotten one Democrat chairman to sign 
one letter of request for records.
    This is a real problem. The thing is I do not do this for 
partisan reasons. My concern is there are people, scientists, 
saying this, that the next pandemic that escapes from a lab 
could kill as much as five percent, or even as much as 50 
percent of the people on the planet. This is what we are 
looking at. We can create monstrous super viruses and nobody 
seems to care whether this came from a lab.
    I appreciate what you are doing. I am very interested in 
the other universities because they do gain-of-function 
research. They have collaborated with China. But I am also 
interested in the military aspect of this. People talk about 
viruses having dual use. You can do it to look for vaccines. 
Everybody wants a vaccine. But it also could be a weapon. 
Everybody has always talked about dual use in this research, 
but we typically, ostensibly, only worked with other countries 
in the civilian area.
    It boggles my mind that nobody seems to know that 
universities--and you all discovered this, which is amazing--
that our universities are giving the money, subcontracting it 
Academy of Military Medical Research, where the scientist there 
has not the title of doctor but general and colonel in the 
People's Liberation Army.
    This is something that I can only encourage you. We will be 
asking you also to do more of it, and we will try to get the 
other side to agree to help us find out more information. But 
we would like to encourage this.
    I am sure you have a team that has been doing this, if you 
would allow them to come and visit with us and talk more about 
what they have. Because sometimes we read a conclusion, and 
they might give us better ideas of things that we want to look 
at as well.
    Mr. Dodaro. Absolutely.
    Senator Paul. I guess the main thing is to isolate in on 
what are the rules for these things, whether people are obeying 
the rules on the subcontracting. And just by not listing it, 
that can be more than an oversight. That can be actually 
obscuring where the money is going as well.
    But I appreciate your work on it, and we would like to get 
back with you further to talk about it, if we can talk to your 
team individually. Thank you.
    Mr. Dodaro. I am equally concerned about this issue, and we 
will continue to focus on it, and to work with your staff.
    Chairman Peters. Thank you, Ranking Member Paul.
    Senator Carper, you are recognized for your questions.

              OPENING STATEMENT OF SENATOR CARPER

    Senator Carper. Thanks. This is one of my favorite days of 
the year. I understand there are one or two people in the room 
that actually work with you at GAO, and if there are a few that 
work at GAO, the most popular place to work in the Federal 
Government, raise your hand. Just convey to your colleagues our 
heartfelt thanks for the great work that you do, and Gene, to 
you for the extraordinary leadership you provided for a long 
time.
    My wife has an interesting sense of humor, and every year 
when it is my birthday--she is a year or two younger than me--
every year when it is my birthday she will say to me, ``What do 
you want on your tombstone? What kind of scripture? What kind 
of songs do you want them to sing at your funeral?'' Finally I 
just said, ``I have had enough. On my tombstone, this is what I 
want.'' Thinking of all the years that I worked on postal 
reform legislation, and with the Chairman, Rob Portman, Richard 
Burr, and others. But anyway, thinking of the great work that 
we did passing postal legislation, I said, ``Martha, I think I 
would like to have on my tombstone, `Return to Sender.' '' 
[Laughter.]
    She did not even blink. She did not even smile. I thought 
it was a pretty good line, and she said, ``If that is not 
available what else would you like to have on your tombstone?'' 
I said, ``I would like to have 'He was deaf on improper 
payments to dead people.' '' That would be pretty good, you 
know? We worked on that one, and several of us worked on that 
one, pretty hard for a long time.
    But on a more serious note, I want to pause and address the 
improper payments, something we talked about ad nauseum, but we 
still need to continue to focus on it. Thank you and your folks 
for your diligence in working with us.
    I also am encouraged--we still have too many government 
operations, too much to criticize and find fault with--but as 
you reported to us, that we are making an improvement in a 
number of areas and several of the key areas have actually been 
taken off of the High Risk List, and we are happy about that.
    As we have learned, payments made through the Paycheck 
Protection Program (PPP), the Economic Injury Disaster Loan 
(EIDL), program during the onset of the pandemic, resulted in 
hundreds of millions of dollars in improper payments. While 
this emergency relief, we know helped thousands of small 
businesses, probably millions, across the country coped with 
adverse economic conditions, these programs remain susceptible 
to high levels of improper payments and fraud.
    In the 116th Congress I worked with Senator Kennedy, 
Senator Peters, Senator Paul, and others on this Committee to 
pass legislation that would endeavor to stop making improper 
payments to dead people, and require data-sharing among Federal 
agencies to ensure that these payments are reduced and 
eventually eliminated.
    Question. Comptroller General, what suggestions does GAO 
have for additional legislative improvements to further address 
improper payments and fraud?
    Mr. Dodaro. Yes. First, I recommended legislation for any 
new Federal program that is created or where there is a major 
increase in a program of $100 million or more, be automatically 
designated susceptible to improper payments. Right now it could 
be one or two years after the program is started before the 
very first improper payment estimate is made. That is too late, 
particularly in some of these emergency programs, the program 
is over before estimates are made. The later you make these 
estimates the less likely you are to recover the improper 
payment.
    Second, agencies should be required to have special 
procedures in place and internal controls before emergency 
spending, or major increases in spending. Right now we have 
made that recommendation to the Office of Management and Budget 
(OMB). Everybody in the Executive Branch thinks the normal 
controls are enough. We do not. We think they need special 
controls, and they know what they need to do. Because this is 
where the push is to get the money out fast without having the 
normal controls in place. You need some kind of tailored 
controls, and you can do both. You can protect the government 
and get the money out fast if you plan ahead and use those 
experiences.
    The last thing I would mention is that there needs to be a 
permanent analytical capability within the inspector general 
community. We had it during the Recovery Act days. It was 
eliminated in 2015. I recommended that Congress make it 
permanent. That did not happen. I am at it again. I would like 
to see it made permanent. The IG community is supportive. They 
can help prevent fraud and improper payments.
    Senator Carper. Great. My staff and my colleagues have 
heard me say, over and over and over again, everything I do, I 
think everything we do, we can do better, and you have given us 
three good ideas to how to do it, an even better job on 
improper payments, especially to people who are no longer with 
us.
    The second area I wanted to pursue in my questions deals 
with establishing a governmentwide cyber workforce plan. As 
folks in this Committee know well, the cyber threat posed by 
hostile nations and groups around the world cannot be 
overstated. We continue to see cyber threat actors evolve and 
advance their techniques in ways that pose a threat to 
business, health care facilities, critical infrastructure, and 
put at risk the financial and personal safety of our countrymen 
and women.
    Unfortunately, the cyber threat landscape is not getting 
less volatile. It is actually getting more volatile. 
Comptroller General, in your statement I believe you mentioned 
that further action is needed in cyberspace when it comes to 
establishing and effectively implementing a governmentwide 
cyber workforce plan.
    My question along those lines is, given that each Federal 
agency's mission and size is so different from one another, how 
best can we establish a governmentwide cyber workforce plan 
that would address the needs of each department in an 
appropriate way.
    Mr. Dodaro. Yes. I am going to ask Nick Marinos, who is our 
expert in the IT and cyber area, to respond, Senator.
    Mr. Marinos. Yes, Senator. First, just to point out we have 
heard from the White House that there are intentions to 
establish the national strategy for cyber workforce in the 
summer. What we would be looking for is, one, a push-back to 
the agencies to continue to identify where they have gaps. Even 
though we have seen some improvement in this area, there is no 
comprehensive way for us to know whether each Federal agency 
actually knows what it needs.
    The second thing is that each agency then needs to focus on 
not only recruiting and hiring but also retaining really highly 
qualified staff. We know there is a shortage, not only within 
the Federal Government--but across the Nation, and so it will 
be important for them to leverage not only the tools that they 
have right now but recent legislation that has called on 
creative ways to try to generate ideas for how to keep Federal 
Government employees actually staying within the Federal 
Government.
    Senator Carper. Great.
    Mr. Dodaro. There are a couple of things I would add. One 
is that there is a problem now between competition among 
agencies for the same talent. I think a governmentwide plan can 
help deal with that issue a bit because there is an unlevel 
playing field. Some agencies have special hiring authorities 
and pay; others do not. I think there needs to be a look at 
that and whether that is rationalized properly.
    The other thing is the Office of Personnel Management 
(OPM). We have just issued a report recently saying Office of 
Personnel Management does not have its own plan for improving 
its workforce--and needs to. The human resource (HR) people in 
the government, whether they are centralized in OPM or in 
individual agencies, are not what we need in order to help 
support the recruitment and hiring of cyber people.
    I think this is also a cautionary tale that we need to get 
ahead in artificial intelligence and quantum computing, because 
there were really no qualification standards for cyber people 
for a number of years, and so we were way behind the curve.
    Senator Carper. Mr. Chairman, we have a saying in the Navy, 
when people do extraordinary work, we use the phrase, ``Bravo 
Zulu.'' I would just say to you, to both of you, to the folks 
that are behind you from GAO and those that may be listening in 
or watching, tuning in today, and those that are hard at work, 
Bravo Zulu. Keep up the great job. Thanks so much.
    Chairman Peters. Thank you, Senator Carper.
    Senator Lankford, you are recognized for your questions.

             OPENING STATEMENT OF SENATOR LANKFORD

    Senator Lankford. Mr. Chairman, thank you. Gene, it is good 
to see you again. Let me start with the same question we talk 
about every year. You will know the rest of this question when 
I start it. Taxpayers Right To Know. We have talked about it 
year after year. It has obviously passed. Twenty million 
dollars was given to OMB to go through the implementation. They 
received that funding. They have said they are doing pilot 
programs. They have also said they are coordinating with you on 
the process.
    Tell me how it is going for Taxpayers Right to Know. They 
have the funding. They have the law. What is actually 
happening?
    Mr. Dodaro. Their current plan right now is to create an 
interagency working group to leverage additional resources 
needed and to get buy-in from the agencies because they are 
going to need to do that. They are going to deploy resources 
this summer and make a major push to try to begin developing an 
inventory and having the pilot.
    I am encouraged by that. It has taken them a while to get 
to this point, so it may put them at a disadvantage in meeting 
the 2025 date that has been established.
    Senator Lankford. Or try anyway. Is your team at the table 
in the conversations on setting the list, setting the 
priorities, setting the program definitions? Because the 
program definitions is a big part of this, and we have to get 
that right at the beginning.
    Mr. Dodaro. Yes. We have been playing an appropriate role, 
protecting our independence, but also being a sounding board 
and making suggestions to them. They are listening, and they 
are adopting some of our suggestions.
    We were the ones that were encouraging them to bring the 
agencies in, not only for resources but to get buy-in.
    Senator Lankford. Get the conversation.
    Mr. Dodaro. Yes, absolutely.
    Senator Lankford. Strategic human capital management has 
been on your list since 2001. It remains on the list. This is 
an issue that I talk about a lot. Our Committee has talked 
about it a lot. Best I can tell there is about 105 hiring 
authorities. When I asked the Chief Human Capitol Officers 
(CHCOs) about it, about 20 of them are used more than 90 
percent of the time. But every time I bring up direct hiring 
authority, everyone has a conniption on it and thinks that will 
never work or whatever it may be, except for the entities that 
actually use it.
    What is it going to take on the strategic human capital in 
trying to be able to figure out, on the hiring side, just the 
hiring portion of it, to be able to simplify this so it is 
actually usable and it does not take 145 days to hire someone 
at the IRS?
    Mr. Dodaro. One of the government-wide shortages and 
critical skill gaps is in the human resource people who 
actually support and run the hiring efforts and activities. 
There are problems at OPM itself, and there are problems in the 
individual agencies. A lot of the human resource people were 
trained over the years, going back to the civil service reform 
days to be compliance oriented, to make sure you do not do 
anything wrong in these areas, as opposed to what can I do to 
be helpful, to help in these difficult areas.
    We need to change that mindset, change that approach, and 
get the right people in there to support them. Then I think 
things will be a lot easier.
    Senator Lankford. You and I have talked several times about 
the census, and I know census has dropped off the list this 
year. But one of the issues that I bring up consistently is the 
IRS, every single year, touches every single person, basically, 
across the country, or a vast majority of them. The census does 
it every 10 years. But for whatever reason, census and IRS will 
not talk to each other. There is some information-sharing 
behind the scenes. But why could not the census, every 10 
years, partner with the IRS, what they do every one year, and 
add a couple of additional questions to your IRS filing, and 
that also fulfills your census as well for that year, and then 
for everyone else that does not do a filing to be able to then 
go pursue those folks?
    That seems too common sense to actually work in the Federal 
Government, but I have been told for 10 years it will not work, 
it will not work, it will not work. I have also asked why it 
will not work, and no one can give me the answer why it will 
not.
    Mr. Dodaro. Yes. The only limitation I can see offhand of 
why it would not work is the timing of it. The census is where 
everybody is on one particular day, when they do the 
measurement, and the IRS filings are a year later. You file one 
year for the previous year.
    Senator Lankford. Right.
    Mr. Dodaro. There may be a timing issue there. But I will 
look at it. I will have our team look at it, and there may be 
ways to overcome that. But to me the timing would be the major 
thing.
    Senator Lankford. It is obviously because it goes door to 
door, trying to be able to check on people. They get as close 
as they can to one day. That one day could be April 15th. That 
would be just a statutory thing for us to be able to say April 
15th is the one date.
    Mr. Dodaro. I will think about it. But you file on April 
15th you are filing for the previous calendar year.
    Senator Lankford. But you are filing where you are this 
year, with your address, where you are this year on it, as 
well. But let's talk about that at length----
    Mr. Dodaro. OK.
    Senator Lankford [continuing]. To be able to go from there.
    There are a couple of things I actually want to bring up. 
Can GAO do oversight on it. You have been in telework status 
for three years now. You are in the process of coming back from 
telework status. I look at your numbers typically in the past. 
You are typically $145 to 1 of recovery. Well done. Spike the 
football. But now in telework status you are at about $72 to 1. 
Is that because of telework status or is that something else?
    Mr. Dodaro. No, that is something else. We have been in 
telework status for a decade. We have had expanded telework. We 
have studied it. It has had no impact on our quality and 
productivity of our work.
    There were two factors that led to the 145, and one year we 
had an all-time record of about $200 billion of savings. 
Normally it is more of a $50 to $70 billion range. Then second, 
during the pandemic, we spent a lot of time looking at the $4.6 
trillion in pandemic spending, so that took us kind of off our 
normal path.
    But we are in pretty good shape and I think we will 
continue to produce a great return on investment.
    Senator Lankford. We do need to talk about telework, 
because I am an advocate for remote work. I think that is a 
possibility. But one of the things I always want to ask you is, 
if you are doing remote work or telework and you are actually 
somewhere else but you are getting paid at a higher rate as if 
you are in Washington, DC, or San Francisco, or somewhere else, 
there are some real inconsistencies there.
    But I think there are some real opportunities. I call the 
time of COVID the world's largest pilot program for telework, 
and there are some real opportunities that I think we can do, 
especially for spouses of military and others in the days 
ahead.
    Mr. Dodaro. Absolutely. Actually, we are in the process of 
negotiating a remote work option with our union right now, and 
the issue around pay is the most appropriate thing. I want to 
make sure it is equitable but not out of line.
    Senator Lankford. Yes. It is an appropriate conversation to 
be able to have, based on where people live and work.
    GAO, it is my understanding, has also put out a new style 
guide for language in it, and I want to just bring this up. We 
can have a longer conversation on this as well. But the style 
guide is trying to be more inclusive in the language. I prefer 
to use the term ``respectful'' in language rather than 
``inclusive,'' and let me give you a reason why.
    In the style guide it tells folks at GAO, when using 
terminology like ``male'' and ``female'' that an agency uses or 
that is written into law, GAO should state the source to not 
give the impression that GAO endorses ``male'' and ``female.'' 
I am not sure that is a good idea because we are back to, if we 
are going to be not offensive, we need to not be offensive to 
everybody.
    There are several other things, taking out terms like 
``manmade'' or ``manpower'' or ``unmanned'' or not using the 
term ``policeman.'' Not talking about a person whose gender 
identity does not align with their sex assigned at birth 
implies a much larger not only political issue but a societal 
issue as well.
    There are several things in the style guide that I look at 
and I say, hey, I really need GAO to stay out of cultural 
battles and to definitely not say if Congress writes a law that 
says ``male'' and ``female'' GAO should basically apologize for 
it and say, ``Hey, their word, not ours.'' There are some 
concerns that are in this.
    I would love to be able to have a conversation about how we 
can keep GAO consistent with where we are both in law and not 
trying to compete with Congress and trying to apologize that 
Congress in errantly uses the word ``male'' and ``female.'' 
This will be a bigger issue that we can talk about at a 
different time as well. But we need GAO to stay GAO. Can I just 
say that?
    Mr. Dodaro. I understand your point, and I would be happy 
to talk to you about it.
    Senator Lankford. Yes. I do not mind respectful language. 
That is a good thing, to honor all people in the process. Thank 
you.
    Chairman Peters. Thank you, Senator Lankford.
    Senator Rosen, you are recognized for your questions.

               OPENING STATEMENT OF SENATOR ROSEN

    Senator Rosen. Thank you, Chairman Peters. Thank you for 
holding this hearing. Thank you for being here today, for all 
the work that you have been doing.
    I want to focus a little bit on government legacy IT. Once 
again, this year's High Risk Report notes that the Federal 
Government efforts to improve the management of IT acquisitions 
and operations is a work in process. We know technology is 
moving quickly. But while your report gives credit to OMB for 
pushing agencies to implement IT reforms, it also states that 
all five ratings for this particular goal remain unchanged 
since 2017. Specifically, you cite 20 recommendations that have 
still not been addressed at 14 agencies, including the 
development of modernization plans for legacy IT systems.
    As someone who began my career in computer programming, 
writing code in Common Business-Oriented Language (COBOL), 
Formula Translation (FORTRAN), Assembler, and others, it does 
trouble me that so many of our Federal agencies continue to use 
that legacy technology that in some cases has been around since 
the 1980s, and it is based on coding language that virtually no 
one works in anymore. This poses serious challenges when the 
technology breaks or malfunctions. Maintenance is a huge part 
of what you do, upgrade and maintenance. You can only patch it 
so many times. I know this from personal experience.
    I am concerned the Federal Government is still getting an 
incomplete on this report card. Can you talk to me about the 
importance of getting our IT systems modernized, streamlined, 
forward-facing, and nimble in our ability to do all the things 
that we have to do, and why are people still only partially 
meeting their goals?
    Mr. Dodaro. This has been a vexing problem that we have 
been trying to push people on for a number of years. The 
problems include poor security. A lot of these systems were not 
built with security in them, so it is complicating our ability 
in cybersecurity area. The cost is expensive. There were 
efforts to try to replace them, but they often fail because of 
lack of discipline with IT management issues.
    One of the things is they are not forced to get off the 
systems and commit to a date. We recommended that OMB do that, 
and they have not implemented that recommendation. I think 
Congress needs to step in here and try to require fixed dates, 
because they just keep rolling these systems forward. It is not 
good for taxpayer customer service issues as well.
    Senator Rosen. I will tell you, none of it in the old code, 
cybersecurity, I mean, there was a single mainframe. There was 
just one point of entry. The world has changed now, and it does 
leave us vulnerable.
    I want to move on now to our cybersecurity strategy 
overall, because since 1997, GAO has designated information 
security, of course, it is high risk. We know it. Everyone 
knows that. This year's High Risk Report calls for the 
Administration to fully establish and implement a comprehensive 
cybersecurity strategy and the implementation plans. Maybe we 
should put those hard dates in there.
    Last month, the Administration released the National 
Cybersecurity Strategy. As the Administration executes the 
National Cybersecurity Strategy, what should be the roles and 
responsibilities of the individual Federal agencies to this 
national strategy that, frankly, if we do not do, all of us, in 
every single way, are vulnerable?
    Mr. Dodaro. This is a critical area. They have committed to 
try to clarify the roles and responsibilities. I will ask Nick 
Marinos to elaborate a little bit.
    Mr. Marinos. Yes, Senator. You raise a really important 
point and one that we would expect to see within an 
implementation plan, which is ultimately outlining not only 
timeframes, outcomes that you want to have in mind, but also 
who is going to ultimately be responsible for working together 
and then being accountable for actually taking action on them.
    Senator Rosen. Could you talk about duplicative programs, 
because maybe we can share front ends. We can populate data 
between agencies that everyone does not have to develop every 
single thing. Maybe you could address that as well.
    Mr. Marinos. Absolutely. The legislation that Congress has 
recently passed not only to enact and create CISA but also to 
empower CISA to be one of the key coordinating bodies, 
especially across the Federal agencies when it comes to its own 
cybersecurity, is an area that you would want to see within an 
implementation plan, and likewise, with the creation of the 
Office of the National Cyber Director, heading in the right 
direction. We would want to see what role does the National 
Cyber Director actually play in holding agencies accountable 
for taking these actions.
    Senator Rosen. Thank you. I am going to keep on this 
because I think it is so important. It is something on the top 
of everybody's mind, whether it is personal, professional, or 
for the world, we see a lot going on. We need people to do this 
work. We need programmers. We need engineers. We need 
cybersecurity, just every kind of analyst that is involved all 
along the chain. We have a huge workforce shortage, and this is 
not just a challenge in this area but in others.
    The report does state, and I am going to quote here, 
``Federal agencies need to take additional actions to address 
the Federal cybersecurity workforce shortage.'' What 
practices--and either one of you can answer--should the Federal 
agencies adopt to solve the cybersecurity workforce shortages? 
I have a lot of opinions, but what measures, what should we be 
putting in place to address this? Apprenticeships? 
Certificates? Two-year? Four-year? All of the above? Maybe you 
could elaborate on that a little bit.
    Mr. Marinos. Yes, Senator. I think the important thing is 
to be creative here, and we realize that if the Federal 
Government is not the only game in town when it comes to 
cybersecurity employment, it needs to be positioned in a way 
that is going to have a lot of flexibility. As mentioned 
earlier, we have seen hiring authorities, flexible hiring 
authorities as one way for Federal agencies to take advantage 
of it. In order to do so, the human resource employees need to 
be aware and cognizant of how to leverage those flexibilities.
    Likewise, the potential to use things like rotational 
workforce or potentially even----
    Senator Rosen. What about a reserve workforce? I have some 
bills out there to create a cyber-reserve workforce to surge 
up.
    Mr. Marinos. It is a really viable option, and I know your 
interests are particularly in DOD and DHS, two places that 
obviously we need to see a very strong and well-capacitied 
cyber workforce.
    I think all options should be on the table because 
ultimately the Federal Government is going to be a competitor 
with its private sector partners and has to operate off of 
different measures.
    Senator Rosen. If we can include them to surge up, that is 
a positive thing. Thank you.
    Senator Blumenthal.
    Senator Blumenthal [presiding.] On behalf of Chairman 
Peters I recognize Senator Hassan.

              OPENING STATEMENT OF SENATOR HASSAN

    Senator Hassan. Thanks, Senator Blumenthal, and I want to 
thank the Chair and the Ranking Member, and I want to thank 
you, Mr. Dodaro, for your service and for being here and for 
all the folks from the GAO who are here this morning and do 
this work. Thank you for your work.
    I want to start with a question and really drilling down on 
technology issues. You are hearing about it all around the dais 
this morning.
    In 2023, the Federal Government is expected to spend more 
than $100 billion on new and existing technology. GAO's High 
Risk List makes two recommendations to help lower costs and 
better manage technology purchases all across the government. 
First GAO recommends that Congress consider giving the Federal 
Chief Information Officer (CIO) greater responsibility to 
address longstanding technology challenges. How could expanding 
the role of the Federal CIO help curb excessive Federal 
spending on technology, and what specific authority do you 
believe the Federal CIO still needs?
    Mr. Dodaro. I am going to ask Nick to respond to this, 
Senator. But first, an historical perspective. I worked with 
the Congress, and this Committee back in 1996, to create the 
Clinger Cohen Act, to create Chief Information Officers in the 
government. They were intended to have much greater 
responsibilities than what has played out over the years. 
Congress attempted to change this in 2014, with the Federal 
Information Technology Acquisition Reform Act (FITARA), but 
still the CIOs do not have all the authorities. Nick can give 
the details.
    Senator Hassan. Thank you.
    Mr. Marinos. Senator, two quick thoughts. First, with 
respect to the Federal CIO's own position. The reality is that 
the Federal Government represents probably the biggest buyer of 
technology within the Nation, and so it is important for us to 
have a way to know that IT's money is being spent effectively. 
Having a strong Federal CIO presence would allow that 
individual to bring Federal agencies to the table, and CIOs and 
leaders of agencies, to know not only are they spending money 
wisely but they are leveraging buying power and we shared 
services.
    Then the other side of it is ultimately to hold CIOs 
accountable, and Federal agency heads accountable toward those 
CIOs as well. We continue to see Federal agencies improve in 
aligning the CIO with agency leadership so that they can 
actually have the ability to see across a Federal agency where 
their IT dollars are being spent. It is a lot of money and does 
require a stronger oversight.
    Senator Hassan. Thank you for that, and you just referenced 
quickly the importance of collaboration between the CIOs and 
their agency leadership. But can you talk a little bit more 
about why that collaboration is so important for reducing IT 
costs and ensuring that agencies have the technology they need 
to serve the American people?
    Mr. Marinos. Certainly. We have seen, on the General 
Service Administration (GSA) side has established a lot of 
functions that allow agencies to leverage shared services, 
which is one way to bring the costs down. But in order to 
encourage agencies to actually leverage those available 
services a Federal CIO could bring CIOs to the table and ensure 
that they are ultimately using their buying power effectively.
    Senator Hassan. OK. Thank you.
    Mr. Dodaro. I think the other issue, Senator, in that case 
is that a lot of the program managers who actually run the 
programs have their own ideas on what they think they need 
technology-wise, and sometimes it is not the most efficient 
approach. You need a technical person to partner with the 
program people, but they need to be supported by the agency 
head. That communication needs to be there in order to make the 
right decisions.
    Senator Hassan. Absolutely. Let us talk a little bit more 
about the National Cybersecurity Strategy, while we are at it. 
For 25 years, the High Risk List has highlighted the importance 
or cybersecurity as a matter of national security, affecting 
not only government but individual schools and businesses, and 
you have talked about that.
    As you mentioned, last month the Biden administration 
released the first-ever National Cybersecurity Strategy, 
something that GAO has supported for years. What should be the 
Federal Government's next step toward executing the National 
Cybersecurity Strategy?
    Mr. Marinos. Ultimately an implementation plan, Senator. 
There are a lot of to-dos in that strategy, and we commend the 
Administration for pursuing it. We have seen it align quite 
closely to many of the actions that we have been calling for 
over the years. But the rubber will meet the road, ultimately, 
with implementation of those strategic goals.
    You mentioned, the issues that we see, for example, in K-12 
schools and the ransomware attacks that we see are only going 
to be assisted by Federal Government agencies if we have better 
coordination. We would want to see the implementation plan 
reflect that coordination as well.
    Senator Hassan. I will also urge them to look at 
collaborating with the Center on Internet Security (CIS) more 
effectively, because I think they are doing some pretty good 
work too.
    Mr. Dodaro, I want to move to a different topic, and thank 
you for highlighting the substance misuse crisis in your 
testimony. In 2022, New Hampshire had the highest death toll 
from drug overdoses since 2017, and as of today, in 2023, 55 
people in my small State have died from drug overdoses. Sadly, 
these numbers reflect a national trend.
    GAO found that expanded access to medication-assisted 
treatment is critical to getting more people into recovery. I 
am proud that my bipartisan bill with Senator Murkowski was 
recently signed into law to expand the number of providers who 
are able to prescribe this lifesaving treatment.
    The High Risk List, however, points out that the Office of 
National Drug Control Policy's (ONDCP) 2022 National Drug 
Control Strategy did not identify resources needed to expand 
the availability of medication-assisted treatment so that more 
people can get it. Why is it important to identify financial, 
personnel, or other resources needed to expand access to 
medication-assisted treatment?
    Mr. Dodaro. Actually, that is a very important issue. We 
have looked at it in terms of both how Medicaid funds could be 
used for that, as well as having additional supporting 
assistance. But part of the problem we have had with the 
strategy is it does not allocate resources appropriately so we 
could measure the impact in that area. But it is very 
important.
    I will ask Jess Farb, who is the director of our health 
care area, to address that more specifically.
    Senator Hassan. Thank you.
    Ms. Farb. Senator, I think in terms of what is expected in 
the Office of National Drug Control Policy's Strategy, we are 
looking to see metrics and goals that will measure the spending 
that you are talking about, to make sure that there is the 
correct amount of funds available to support this. It is 
definitely a tool that is very important for recovery from drug 
misuse. I wanted to also bring in my colleague, Charles 
Johnson, as well, who is my partner in this.
    Senator Hassan. Thank you.
    Mr. Johnson. Thanks, Jess. Senator, one of the things we 
did see absent from the strategy was they have goals set up but 
they do not have the budget allocations over a five-year 
period. What we have heard from the ONDCP is that they do not 
disclose the President's budget over a five-year period.
    But we will continue to look into this and work with them 
to see if we can get them to think about that as well as 
engaging with some of the key partners, other agencies 
involved, as well as State and locals.
    Senator Hassan. Thank you. I mean, one of our challenges, 
now that we are allowing much more access to medication-
assisted treatment is to figure out how to make sure that it is 
truly accessible and that pharmacies are participating as well. 
I look forward to working with you on that. Thank you.
    Senator Blumenthal. On behalf of Chairman Peters I 
recognize Senator Scott.

               OPENING STATEMENT OF SENATOR SCOTT

    Senator Scott. Thank you, Chairman. Comptroller Dodaro, I 
think you and your team do an unbelievable job. I think you are 
a great Federal resource. I have been up here four years and 
you have been unbelievably helpful in reviewing how government 
works. I wanted to thank you and your entire team for what you 
do.
    The first question is how important is it that the Federal 
Government have independent inspectors general?
    Mr. Dodaro. I think it is absolutely essential.
    Senator Scott. What would be some of the reasons why a 
Federal agency should have one, an independent inspector 
general?
    Mr. Dodaro. There are two reasons. One is that they need to 
have an investigative function in there. Many of them have 
criminal investigators and other tools that can look at 
misconduct with regard to the Federal employees in that area or 
contractors or other areas. Some of these agencies are so large 
that you need to have an independent audit function as well to 
be able to provide information. They are structured so that 
they report not only to the agency head but also to the 
Congress. That was the way they were set up, and by and large 
it has worked effectively over the years.
    At GAO, we cannot cover the entire Federal Government with 
the resources that Congress has given us, so we leverage the 
IGs to make sure we do not duplicate what they do. They 
arrange, for example, the annual financial audit, of the 
agency's financial statements. We review the work. It is 
usually done by an Intergovernmental Personnel Act (IPA), and 
then we can use that to rely on and make our report on the 
governmentwide financial statements.
    Senator Scott. So the Federal Reserve has nearly a $9 
trillion balance sheet, and I do not think there is any Federal 
agency that has probably a $9 trillion balance sheet other than 
the Federal Reserve. And they do not have an independent 
inspector general. So do you think it would be appropriate for 
them to be like, what is it, over 30 Federal agencies have 
independent inspectors generals? Would that make sense?
    Mr. Dodaro. Yes, I think that would make sense. When I 
first became Acting Comptroller General I actually came to the 
Congress and asked for a statutory inspector general at GAO, so 
we have one there. I think it is important that the statutory 
IGs have certain protections and notification requirements, et 
cetera.
    There is one agency that has a balance sheet higher than 
that. Unfortunately, it is the Bureau of Public Debt. But in 
any event, that is a side issue.
    Senator Scott. You have written a lot about this, but I 
watched, when I was Governor of Florida and we had the 
hurricanes, and I watched how much fraud and abuse there was 
with regard to a variety of things that FEMA would contract 
for, or the Corps of Engineers. And one of the biggest is 
debris cleanup. It is frustrating because you just see this 
significant amount of waste.
    So I have had a bill that would require, as an example, any 
entity that is going to do debris cleanup, like counties and 
cities have a pre-landfall contract and then enforce it. And 
then we have way more review because, as you know, as I think 
you all have written, the Federal Emergency Management 
Administration (FEMA) cut back on a lot of their review of when 
they pay.
    I think with Hurricane Irma it was over $1 billion just in 
debris cleanup. Do you think we ought to have some way to stop 
all this fraud?
    Mr. Dodaro. Absolutely. I think that debris removal is not 
only expensive but it is the critical path to recovery. It is 
the first thing that needs to be done. I think because of that 
there are a lot of people who take advantage of that situation 
because of the urgency and the dilemma facing people. Whenever 
we have seen in emergencies, you saw that with the pandemic, it 
brings out the best in human nature but it brings out a lot of 
the fraudsters in those areas, and disaster relief is no 
exception to that.
    I think the bill that you and Senator Peters are working on 
is a good step forward to help focus on that issue and put more 
attention on it, as was the Advanced Contracting Act that this 
Committee passed in 2020. But the proposed legislation builds 
further on that.
    Senator Scott. Another issue that came up while I was 
Governor is national flood insurance. We have been three-plus 
donor States since national flood insurance came in, and what I 
watched while I was Governor is there is an unbelievable 
increase in certain areas of rates. You would think, if you 
were a donor State, of any amount but especially triple donor 
State, you would not think you would see that.
    How important is it for FEMA and the Federal Government to 
do everything they can to help build a private flood insurance 
program to reduce the risk of the National Flood Insurance 
Program (NFIP)?
    Mr. Dodaro. I think it is very important that that program 
be reformed. It has been on our High Risk List as a separate 
program since 2006 following Hurricanes Katrina and Rita. Right 
now there is an over $20 billion debt that the program owes to 
the Treasury, and that is after the Federal Government has 
forgiven $16 billion in debt that was owed before. It is not 
actuarially sound, and as a result, there are a lot of 
inequities in the program that are hard to keep up to date.
    Trying to have a private market for it, the question is 
whether or not that could be structured in a way that would be 
attractive to insurers, because they are going to charge 
actuarially sound rates or they are not going to insure. The 
Federal Government could provide more affordability assistance 
to help people with the rates, as opposed to running the 
program itself. I think that should be given serious 
consideration.
    Senator Scott. Thank you. First off, I will tell you, the 
reports you guys put out are unbelievable. You guys do an 
unbelievable job, your whole team does, so thank you for what 
you do.
    Mr. Dodaro. Thank you, Senator.

            OPENING STATEMENT OF SENATOR BLUMENTHAL

    Senator Blumenthal. Thank you, Senator Scott. I have a few 
questions and then we may reach a conclusion.
    I want to come back to an area that Senator Carper asked 
about, on the Small Business Administration (SBA), and I want 
to drill down a little bit on PPP and EIDL. I think the SBA did 
vital work in dispensing $1.1 trillion very expeditiously, as 
was required by the times, and we all, I think, realized that 
there was also a good deal of waste and possibly even fraud.
    In your view, is there still a need to look into and dig 
down deeper into the way those programs were performed, both to 
hold accountable the companies that may have received benefits 
illegally, and also to learn some lessons, more broadly, about 
these kinds of programs in the future? As much as we may 
appreciate what SBA did, there were also a lot of companies, 
small and medium-sized businesses that were denied these 
benefits because the program ran out of money. It performed a 
vital function, making money available, saving businesses, but 
at the same time it became a target for waste and fraud, and 
thereby denied some of the worthwhile businesses what they 
needed and deserved.
    On those two programs is there work still to be done?
    Mr. Dodaro. Absolutely. I think your articulation of the 
circumstances and what happened is exactly, precisely the way I 
have seen it unfold, and we are working with SBA to try to have 
them build in a better fraud risk framework in the first place. 
We actually worked with the Congress back in 2016, to pass the 
Fraud Reduction and Data Analytics Act, which required agencies 
to implement GAO's best practices for how to prevent fraud in 
the first place. SBA was slow to implement that, and therefore 
it was not in place before the pandemic hit, when it should 
have been. They were not well positioned to take on the 
additional spending during that period of time.
    The first fraud risk assessment that they did was after the 
program was over, and that is not as helpful, obviously. They 
need to have a better program in place. The Economic Injury 
Disaster Loan Program is an ongoing program activity too, going 
forward. Even though they built a special component on it, it 
is there. Then there is the normal disaster loan program that 
SBA has in place going forward. We are working with them to try 
to get them to be better prepared.
    I think another lesson learned is to not allow self-
certifications. That was a problem and that invited fraud in a 
number of areas.
    There are key lessons learned by digging deeper into the 
programs, and I have made some additional recommendations to 
the Congress as well about making sure agencies can focus on 
and prevent fraud in the first place, because they do not 
recover that much as a percent of the funds after it happens.
    Senator Blumenthal. There is a lot of money still to be 
recovered. Is that what you are saying?
    Mr. Dodaro. Yes, there could be. Congress, for those two 
programs, has passed an extension of the statute of limitations 
so that the inspectors general can go further, and the 
Department of Justice (DOJ), into criminal prosecutions, and I 
think that is fine. The Administration has also recommended 
doing that in the unemployment insurance area, and I think that 
would be a good idea as well.
    Senator Blumenthal. In your view, from what you have seen, 
was there an awareness at the time that these loans, later 
becoming grants, going out were going to the wrong people?
    Mr. Dodaro. I tried to raise awareness that we needed to do 
a better job checking about that, but SBA was not in the 
mindset of hearing that, initially in the program. To their 
point, there was enormous pressure to get the money out quickly 
during that period of time, and I understood that. But when I 
went in I offered, I talked to the SBA administrator at the 
time, to help them design things.
    We did that, if you recall, during the global financial 
crisis when the Troubled Asset Review Program (TARP) was set 
up. I worked with Secretary Paulson and his team. We helped 
give advice on building internal controls in up front. That 
program, while it was not popular, was effective, and you had 
nowhere near the amount of fraud that you have in these 
programs. But the SBA, in the original days of the creation of 
that program, were too busy to focus on that. We have to get 
this money out.
    I think there were people who had concerns, us and the 
inspector general, but we were not able to persuade them to 
listen.
    Senator Blumenthal. But they could have listened. In other 
words, you can be busy getting money out and at the same time 
impose some safeguards. I will tell you, just anecdotally, I 
heard, during this time, because I was going to bat for small 
businesses who needed money, and what I heard was, ``Oh, we 
have run out of money.'' The small businesses would come to me 
and say, ``We have heard X, Y, and Z company got millions of 
dollars. They do not fit the criteria. What is going on here? 
Can't you do something about it?'' They were coming down, 
rightfully, on their elected representatives. If we were aware 
of it, was not SBA, and could they not have done something.
    Mr. Dodaro. Yes, they could have but did not.
    Senator Blumenthal. I would like to follow up with you on 
this issue because I think that the lessons that you are 
learning should be more widely known throughout government. 
This is an unfair question but I am going to ask it--of the 
$1.1 trillion, do you have kind of a ballpark number on how 
much was misdirected? I am using ``misdirected'' purposefully 
because I do not want to say ``waste,'' I do not want to say 
``fraud,'' but just went into the wrong hands?
    Mr. Dodaro. Yes. I do not have that number for SBA and the 
PPP program. In the unemployment insurance area, we have 
estimated that at least $60 billion, at the low end, was 
fraudulent. We are working on a higher-end estimate now. They 
had an already existing methodology for estimating fraud in the 
regular unemployment insurance program ahead of time, so we 
have been able to use that as a basis to make an estimate. You 
really did not have that in the SBA programs.
    But we have information on the number of investigations and 
prosecutions and the amount of recoveries. We are happy to 
share with you and your team. I am happy to talk about this. We 
are making more headway now with the current Administration on 
this area, and they are taking that seriously.
    But for three straight years now, the financial auditor of 
SBA's financial statements has been unable to give an opinion 
on their financial statements because of these problems. There 
is a significant amount of issues here. That is why I have kept 
them on the High Risk List until they get them resolved going 
forward.
    But there are definitely lessons to be learned that could 
be more broadly applied, and hopefully used in the future. In 
June I will have been in GAO 50 years, so what I have seen, 
over the years, is the lessons fade in terms of when the next 
crisis comes, and then the whole thing gets overcome by events 
and people doing this.
    Also, there has been an estimate at SBA for the PPP program 
that there was $29 billion in improper payments that were made. 
Now that does not mean they were fraudulent, but that tells you 
some level of magnitude.
    Senator Blumenthal. Some impropriety.
    Mr. Dodaro. Yes.
    Senator Blumenthal. Let me ask you, I am assuming, as a 
former prosecutor, I was the U.S. Attorney in Connecticut for 
four and half years and then I was State Attorney General for 
about 20 years. But I am assuming there is still a lot of work 
to be done in recovering that money. Am I correct?
    Mr. Dodaro. That is correct. There is a Pandemic Response 
Accountability Committee (PRAC) made up of the inspectors 
general that is led by Michael Horowitz as the chair, who is 
the Inspector General of the Justice Department. They are 
focused on this. There are investigations ongoing both at Labor 
and at the Small Business Administration, in addition to the IG 
community. That is why they have asked for the extensions on 
statute of limitations. They are working hard at it.
    Senator Blumenthal. I would like to follow up with you, and 
I will be contacting Mr. Horowitz as well, as not only a Member 
of this Committee but also as the Chairman of the Permanent 
Subcommittee on Investigations (PSI).
    I do not know whether Senator Ossoff wants to ask his 
questions now. I have a few more questions on a different 
topic, if I may.
    Senator Ossoff. Sure. I have not yet voted. Have you, 
Senator Blumenthal? OK, then go right ahead. We will be 
stragglers together.
    Senator Blumenthal. Food safety, another area that is close 
to your heart, I know, and close to mine as well. I have been a 
strong advocate of a separate food safety agency. Right now, as 
you well know, the authority is fractured in 15 different 
agencies. There are 30 different Federal laws, and as a result 
nobody is really doing enough and doing it quickly enough. I 
think you are well aware with what happened with the infant 
formula contamination. But it is just one example of how the 
present system is failing.
    Do you favor establishing a dedicated food safety agency?
    Mr. Dodaro. That is obviously a policy issue for the 
Congress. I think it is worthy of examination. It has been on 
the High Risk List for a number of years. Initially, when we 
put it on the list, we were pushing for a single food safety 
agency, but we were getting no traction. We went with the next 
best thing, which was a governmentwide plan with performance 
measures, and a permanent working group on food safety issues, 
which was in place years ago but had been abandoned. There was 
not a formal coordination mechanism. There was not a 
governmentwide plan. That is what our current recommendations 
are.
    What we said is if that does not happen Congress should 
look at reorganization and creating a blue-ribbon commission to 
look at that. But certainly that is one option that I think is 
worthy of consideration, particularly on how stretched FDA is 
with their responsibilities. With the drug area and the food 
area, there is a lot on their plate.
    Senator Blumenthal. They have a lot on their plate, and we 
may not have success this session with the Food Safety 
Administration Act, introduced last Congress by my colleague in 
the House, Representative DeLauro, and here in the Senate by 
Senator Durbin. I co-sponsored it and I have been a strong 
advocate of it. The FDA could do more, and it has a lot of 
different responsibilities. But I think the Nation needs to do 
a lot more, and I welcome the opportunity to continue this 
conversation with you.
    Mr. Dodaro. Yes, I think it is very appropriate, 
particularly given the imported areas of where we are bringing 
food in. We still have a lot of good domestic production, but 
in a lot of areas we are using a global supply chain. I think 
that heightens, as it has on the drug side. It is equally 
heightened on the food side.
    Senator Blumenthal. Thank you. Thanks for your work and 
your team's. I really appreciate you being here and your 
contribution to our Nation. Thank you.
    Mr. Dodaro. Thank you, Senator.
    Senator Blumenthal. I will yield to Senator Ossoff and turn 
the gavel over to him.

              OPENING STATEMENT OF SENATOR OSSOFF

    Senator Ossoff [presiding.] Thank you, Senator Blumenthal. 
Comptroller General, nice to see you again. I want to thank you 
and your team for the support that you have provided to several 
investigations I have led over the last couple of years, in 
particular the research and analysis that you produced 
supporting the PSI bipartisan investigation into deaths in 
custody in State and local facilities across the country, an 
issue I know Senator Blumenthal is focused on as well.
    I led an investigation last year into the Bureau of 
Prisons, and introduced bipartisan legislation with Senator 
Braun called the Federal Prisons Oversight Act, to establish 
greater accountability and transparency within the BOP.
    In the newly added section of the High Risk List titled 
``Management of the Federal Prison System,'' you cite a 
February 2021 report that you produced, which found BOP did not 
have reliable methods for assessing its staffing levels. Can 
you describe the methodology that you observed BOP using to 
evaluate its staffing needs, and how and why it so inadequately 
guides their staffing efforts?
    Mr. Dodaro. Yes. I am going to ask my colleague, Charles 
Johnson, who is head of that work. But what we noticed 
initially that led to the conclusion, between 2017 and 2021, 
their use of overtime went up over 100 percent, and that is 
always an indication that you have kind of staffing challenge. 
But Charles can explain the details.
    Senator Ossoff. Sure. Thank you, Mr. Johnson.
    Mr. Johnson. Yes, Senator. In addition to what the 
Comptroller General just mentioned, not only did overtime go 
up, it is continuing to go up, and there have been continued 
gaps in their staffing as well. As a matter of fact, the data 
we have in the report now we have recently gotten updates, as 
of yesterday or this morning, and the numbers are continuing to 
decline. They have a 15 percent gap in their authorized 
staffing levels.
    Also based on all the work we have done in the past couple 
of years where we have looked at their efforts to calculate 
staff, we did not see a good methodology in place. That is one 
of the recommendations we had made, and we think the new 
Director Peters is committed to looking into that issue. We 
have had several meetings with her, including the Comptroller 
General meeting with her. At the time we were meeting with her 
she was in the process of doing strategic planning. She also is 
looking to establish clear goals with respect to their staffing 
needs, as well as other programs that they have.
    Senator Ossoff. I think Director Peters has acknowledge 
multiple times the negative impact of these staffing 
challenges.
    From your perspective, Mr. Johnson, what are those impacts, 
the ramifications for the Administration of Federal Prisons?
    Mr. Johnson. Some of the things we point out in our report, 
she has acknowledged the safety and security of the inmates as 
well as her own staff. As you know, some of the deaths in 
custody work that you looked at and championed, and some of the 
things we have looked at recently with respect to some of the 
facilities, there has been a unit closed as result of the lack 
of sufficient care in custody of some of the inmates, and 
Director Peters herself has been responsible for the closure.
    Senator Ossoff. Remaining on the subject or deaths in 
custody, the bipartisan investigation that I led with Senator 
Johnson detailed the failures of DOJ to account for deaths in 
custody. GAO recommended, in March of this year, that BOP 
collect and monitor participation data for unstructured 
activities that incarcerated people participate in to earn 
first-step time credits, but BOP did not concur with this 
recommendation.
    Given that participation in these programs can mean an 
earlier release for offenders, good-time credits, can you 
describe some of these programs and the difficulties BOP is 
having with implementation?
    Mr. Johnson. Yes. Part of the issue is that there is a not 
a clear sort of criteria for what programs count. There are 
some situations where inmates may be getting credit for just 
sitting in their cell, which should be not part of the 
criteria. In addition, there are inconsistencies that we found 
at different facilities in terms of how time credits are being 
allotted, or not given credit for certain time credits. Even 
the inmates themselves do not know what they can do to get the 
time credits.
    Those are some of the things that we recommended that they 
address as well, come up with clear guidance and criteria for 
how you can obtain time credits.
    Senator Ossoff. Did BOP communicate to you why they did not 
concur with your recommendation that they collect and monitor 
participation data?
    Mr. Johnson. They did not see the need. They felt like what 
they had in place was clear. Obviously, we wrote in our report 
that we disagree, and we think it is something important that 
they need to do, primarily so individuals incarcerated will 
know what they can do to earn their time credits.
    Mr. Dodaro. I plan to elevate this to what we consider a 
priority recommendation that should be implemented. We are 
going to continue to push for the implementation of this 
recommendation. I think it is needed. Every year I write a 
letter to every major department in the Federal Government, to 
the head of the agency, in this case the Attorney General (AG), 
and list what I think are priority open recommendations that 
have not been implemented yet. This will be on the list for 
this report.
    I asked the same question, and that is not a satisfactory 
answer, in my opinion.
    Senator Ossoff. This Congress I am leading the Human Rights 
Subcommittee of the Judiciary Committee alongside Senator 
Blackburn. As I mentioned, GAO has provided, the last couple of 
years, very robust support and prompt responses to my requests 
for analysis at the Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations.
    Comptroller General, will you duly and timely consider any 
requests for further GAO work product that I may make in order 
to advance investigations at the Human Rights Subcommittee?
    Mr. Dodaro. Yes.
    Senator Ossoff. Let us talk a little bit about some DOD 
issues. Since 1990, when GAO first published the High Risk 
List, DOD weapons system acquisition has been consistently 
listed as a high-risk item, indicating the potential for fraud, 
waste, abuse, and mismanagement. As the GAO report states, for 
much of this period DOD weapons systems were, ``consistently 
costing more, taking longer to develop, and performing at 
lower-than-anticipated levels.''
    In your view, is DOD negotiating effectively when it 
engages in procurement, to get the best value for taxpayers? 
How would you assess the work of the Director, Operational Test 
& Evaluation (ODT&E) at evaluating the development of systems 
that DOD is procuring, and do you have any other specific 
recommendations for Congress whereby perhaps through the 
National Defense Authorization Act (NDAA) we could improve 
procurement practices at the Department?
    Mr. Dodaro. Yes. First, with regard to prices, competition 
is the key to getting the lowest price, as we have seen over 
the years, and initially there is some competition in this 
area, but quickly they go down to a single contractor. Now they 
do have the ability to get price information from that 
contractor, but also negotiate. But once you go down to a 
single contractor you lose a lot of the value of competition. 
That is part of the problem with the weapons systems.
    What we have also said in that area is that they move 
forward at times from research into development (R&D) and then 
into production before the technologies are mature. There are 
simultaneous things going on, and then that leads to costly 
redesigns later on in the process.
    What happens in the DOD, and particularly in the weapons 
systems, is an enormous push to be on a par with or ahead of 
our adversaries, and there is a military need for this, which 
tends to override some of the normal practices you would use to 
bring down costs, and not do simultaneous production while you 
have not matured fully the technology. That is an issue.
    We have made a number of recommendations to not go into 
full production until they have matured the technologies. We 
have raised that issue on the Joint Strike Fighter (JSF) and 
other things over the years. That is definitely an issue.
    We have constantly recommended leading practices for how to 
manage these acquisitions over time, and we have seen some 
improvements in some areas. But where there is that desire to 
compete with China or Russia or whatever, sometimes the cost 
takes a back seat.
    Senator Ossoff. Where there are substantial cost overruns, 
the Department still has substantial leverage in these 
relationships. How could it better exert that leverage in order 
to spare taxpayers the cost, whether either the program office 
has not accurately projected costs or the producer has failed 
to meet a budget?
    Mr. Dodaro. Yes. A lot depends on how they structure the 
contract in the first place. They have been trying to move in 
some areas to a fixed-price structure, and if things go over 
then the contractor eats some of the costs, versus the Federal 
Government. But if they are on a cost-reimbursable contract, we 
suggested they be careful in what type of contracts that they 
struck over time.
    But we have some additional recommendations. I will provide 
them for the record in that area, because it is a pretty 
complicated area.
    Senator Ossoff. Thank you for your testimony today and the 
service of your whole team to the Legislative Branch. You 
really empower us to more effectively execute our oversight and 
responsibility. We are grateful to you and your team.
    The hearing record will remain open for 15 days, that is 
until May 5th, at 5 p.m., for the submission of statements and 
questions for the record. The hearing is adjourned. [Whereupon, 
at 11:39 a.m., the hearing was adjourned.]

                            A P P E N D I X

                              ----------                              

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

                                 [all]

