
 - NOMINATIONS OF SARAH BIANCHI, JAYME RAY WHITE, AND MELANIE ANNE EGORIN

[Senate Hearing 117-659]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]





                                



                                                        S. Hrg. 117-659
 
 NOMINATIONS OF SARAH BIANCHI, JAYME RAY WHITE, AND MELANIE ANNE EGORIN

=======================================================================

                                HEARING

                               before the

                          COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
                          UNITED STATES SENATE

                    ONE HUNDRED SEVENTEENTH CONGRESS

                             FIRST SESSION

                                 on the

                             NOMINATIONS OF

 SARAH BIANCHI, TO BE DEPUTY UNITED STATES TRADE REPRESENTATIVE (ASIA, 
        AFRICA, INVESTMENT, SERVICES, TEXTILES, AND INDUSTRIAL 
 COMPETITIVENESS), WITH THE RANK OF AMBASSADOR; JAYME RAY WHITE, TO BE 
DEPUTY UNITED STATES TRADE REPRESENTATIVE (WESTERN HEMISPHERE, EUROPE, 
THE MIDDLE EAST, LABOR, AND ENVIRONMENT), WITH THE RANK OF AMBASSADOR; 
  AND MELANIE ANNE EGORIN, TO BE ASSISTANT SECRETARY FOR LEGISLATION, 
                DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES

                               __________

                             JUNE 24, 2021

                               __________

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]                                     
                                     

            Printed for the use of the Committee on Finance
            
            
                  ______

             U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE 
 51-993                WASHINGTON : 2023
           
            
            
            
            


                          COMMITTEE ON FINANCE

                      RON WYDEN, Oregon, Chairman

DEBBIE STABENOW, Michigan            MIKE CRAPO, Idaho
MARIA CANTWELL, Washington           CHUCK GRASSLEY, Iowa
ROBERT MENENDEZ, New Jersey          JOHN CORNYN, Texas
THOMAS R. CARPER, Delaware           JOHN THUNE, South Dakota
BENJAMIN L. CARDIN, Maryland         RICHARD BURR, North Carolina
SHERROD BROWN, Ohio                  ROB PORTMAN, Ohio
MICHAEL F. BENNET, Colorado          PATRICK J. TOOMEY, Pennsylvania
ROBERT P. CASEY, Jr., Pennsylvania   TIM SCOTT, South Carolina
MARK R. WARNER, Virginia             BILL CASSIDY, Louisiana
SHELDON WHITEHOUSE, Rhode Island     JAMES LANKFORD, Oklahoma
MAGGIE HASSAN, New Hampshire         STEVE DAINES, Montana
CATHERINE CORTEZ MASTO, Nevada       TODD YOUNG, Indiana
ELIZABETH WARREN, Massachusetts      BEN SASSE, Nebraska
                                     JOHN BARRASSO, Wyoming

                    Joshua Sheinkman, Staff Director

                Gregg Richard, Republican Staff Director

                                  (II)


                            C O N T E N T S

                              ----------                              

                           OPENING STATEMENT

                                                                   Page
Wyden, Hon. Ron, a U.S. Senator from Oregon, chairman, Committee 
  on Finance.....................................................     1

                         CONGRESSIONAL WITNESS

Neal, Hon. Richard E., a U.S. Representative from Massachusetts..     3

                        ADMINISTRATION NOMINEES

Bianchi, Sarah, nominated to be Deputy United States Trade 
  Representative (Asia, Africa, Investment, Services, Textiles, 
  and Industrial Competitiveness), with the rank of Ambassador, 
  Executive Office of the President, Washington, DC..............     5
White, Jayme Ray, nominated to be Deputy United States Trade 
  Representative (Western Hemisphere, Europe, the Middle East, 
  Labor, and Environment), with the rank of Ambassador, Executive 
  Office of the President, Washington, DC........................     6
Egorin, Melanie Anne, Ph.D., nominated to be Assistant Secretary 
  for Legislation, Department of Health and Human Services, 
  Washington, DC.................................................     8

               ALPHABETICAL LISTING AND APPENDIX MATERIAL

Bianchi, Sarah:
    Testimony....................................................     5
    Prepared statement...........................................    33
    Biographical information.....................................    34
    Responses to questions from committee members................    45
Crapo, Hon. Mike:
    Prepared statement...........................................    58
Egorin, Melanie Anne, Ph.D.:
    Testimony....................................................     8
    Prepared statement...........................................    59
    Biographical information.....................................    60
    Responses to questions from committee members................    70
Neal, Hon. Richard E.:
    Testimony....................................................     3
White, Jayme Ray:
    Testimony....................................................     6
    Prepared statement...........................................    73
    Biographical information.....................................    74
    Responses to questions from committee members................    79
Wyden, Hon. Ron:
    Opening statement............................................     1
    Prepared statement...........................................    90

                             Communication

American Forest and Paper Association............................    93

                                 (III)


                  NOMINATIONS OF SARAH BIANCHI, TO BE



                       DEPUTY UNITED STATES TRADE



                     REPRESENTATIVE (ASIA, AFRICA,



                  INVESTMENT, SERVICES, TEXTILES, AND



                 INDUSTRIAL COMPETITIVENESS), WITH THE



                  RANK OF AMBASSADOR; JAYME RAY WHITE,



                    TO BE DEPUTY UNITED STATES TRADE



                  REPRESENTATIVE (WESTERN HEMISPHERE,



                  EUROPE, THE MIDDLE EAST, LABOR, AND



                     ENVIRONMENT), WITH THE RANK OF



                  AMBASSADOR; AND MELANIE ANNE EGORIN,



                     TO BE ASSISTANT SECRETARY FOR



                   LEGISLATION, DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH



                           AND HUMAN SERVICES

                              ----------                              


                        THURSDAY, JUNE 24, 2021

                                       U.S. Senate,
                                      Committee on Finance,
                                                    Washington, DC.
    The hearing was convened, pursuant to notice, at 10:30 
a.m., via Webex, in Room SD-215, Dirksen Senate Office 
Building, Hon. Ron Wyden (chairman of the committee) presiding.
    Present: Senators Cantwell, Cardin, Brown, Casey, 
Whitehouse, Hassan, Cortez Masto, Warren, Crapo, Grassley, 
Thune, Toomey, Lankford, Daines, and Young.
    Also present: Democratic staff: Sally Laing, Senior 
International Trade Counsel; Virginia Lenahan, Senior 
International Trade Counsel; Ian Nicholson, Investigator and 
Nominations Advisor; and Joshua Sheinkman, Staff Director. 
Republican staff: Kellie McConnell, Health Policy Director; 
John O'Hara, Trade Policy Director and Counsel; Mayur Patel, 
Chief International Trade Counsel; Gregg Richard, Staff 
Director; and Jeffrey Wrase, Deputy Staff Director and Chief 
Economist.

   OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. RON WYDEN, A U.S. SENATOR FROM 
             OREGON, CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON FINANCE

    The Chairman. The Finance Committee will come to order. Let 
me begin by apologizing to Chairman Neal and our nominees for 
having to be late in starting. Every living person in the West 
is essentially collectively holding their breath about the 
prospect of yet more wildfires hitting all over our region, big 
fires. I apologize to Chairman Neal and our guests, and I want 
to welcome them.
    This morning, the Finance Committee meets to discuss three 
nominations for important roles in the Biden administration. 
Dr. Melanie Egorin is nominated to serve as the Assistant 
Secretary for Legislation at HHS. There are not many people out 
there who know more about America's Federal health programs 
than Dr. Egorin does, particularly Medicare. Currently a top 
staff member of the Ways and Means Committee, Dr. Egorin also 
served as a senior analyst at the Government Accountability 
Office. This is a job that gives you a close look under the 
hood when it comes to Federal programs and agencies' 
experiences that will be particularly valuable to you as 
Assistant Secretary.
    The Finance Committee is going to do our part to keep Dr. 
Egorin busy if and when she is confirmed. For example, this 
committee is hard at work on legislation built around the 
proposition that every American must have mental health care 
when they need it. Tens of millions of Americans are living 
with mental illness today. Half do not get any treatment. There 
is a lot of work to be done, as the committee discussed in a 
very good hearing last week.
    The committee is also working to bring down costs of 
prescription medicine. Americans are still getting clobbered 
every time they walk up to the pharmacy window. The committee 
is hard at work on expanding home and community-based services 
across the country as well. So all of these issues are going to 
require close collaboration between the Senate, Chairman Neal 
and the Ways and Means Committee, and HHS.
    Next are two nominees to serve as Deputy United States 
Trade Representatives. I will begin with Sarah Bianchi, who is 
a long-time member of the Biden economic team. She served in 
the Office of the Vice President, the Domestic Policy Council, 
the Office of Management and Budget, and here in the Senate as 
a staff member. She has played a key role in developing a 
strong Biden agenda focused on making the United States more 
competitive in the world and giving working people a better 
chance to get ahead. The breadth of her policy experience, in 
my view, is going to be a big asset for Ambassador Tai and 
USTR.
    Finally, there is somebody named Jayme White who has been 
nominated to serve as Deputy USTR. Rumor has it that he is a 
familiar face here at the Senate Finance Committee. So, light 
comments aside, it is a pleasure to be able to speak a little 
bit about why I believe Jayme White is an excellent nominee. 
And it is not just because he hails from the Pacific Northwest 
and is the son of union workers at Boeing.
    He has worked on trade policy for more than 20 years on 
Capitol Hill. In 2019, I had the good fortune to be able to 
lure him away from his job working for his hometown 
representative, someone Chairman Neal knows well, 
Representative Jim McDermott. Since 2014, Jayme has been the 
top trade and competitiveness advisor here for the Finance 
Committee Democrats.
    All in all, for more than a decade I have had a front row 
seat to be able to watch Jayme move every trade negotiation and 
every legislative proposal in a way that is better for workers, 
for the environment, and for good government. For example, 
Jayme focused on strengthening America's trade enforcement long 
before the topic became cool. He was the key individual 
building support for the FORCE Act of 2015 and 2016. Since it 
passed, Customs has used it to launch over 130 investigations 
into trade cheating that undercuts high-skill, high-wage jobs, 
that directly undercuts the American workers.
    When the Trump administration's new NAFTA was weak on 
enforcement, Jayme and Ambassador Tai worked to make huge 
improvements. As a direct result of their work, USMCA raises 
the bar over any trade agreement previously in terms of 
enforceable commitments on labor rights and the environment.
    Jayme has been a leader when it comes to setting standards 
for digital trade that protect American jobs and innovation. He 
has also been a champion of transparency and accountability. It 
used to be--and I think Chairman Neal recalls the times as 
well--when members of Congress knew less about what was going 
on during trade negotiations than well-connected reporters and 
industry insiders.
    If members of Congress did not have much access, then the 
American people were in the dark. We said then that was not 
good enough, and to a great extent Jayme White is the person 
responsible for changing it. Among the host of improvements, 
members now have access to negotiating texts while negotiations 
are happening, and pending agreements must be publicly 
available for at least 60 days before they go to the Congress 
for approval.
    That represents real progress that this committee needs to 
build on. I will just close by saying, if you have Jayme White 
on your team--as my mother used to say when I was going to 
basketball games and she wondered where I was going afterwards: 
``Dear, make sure you are running with the right crowd.'' That 
is what Jayme White's public service has been all about.
    I want to thank our witnesses for joining the committee 
today, and for their willingness to serve. And let me recognize 
Chairman Neal for his opener.
    [The prepared statement of Chairman Wyden appears in the 
appendix.]

              STATEMENT OF HON. RICHARD E. NEAL, 
            A U.S. REPRESENTATIVE FROM MASSACHUSETTS

    Representative Neal. Thank you, Chairman Wyden and members 
of the committee. I want to congratulate all of the nominees, 
and I am quite pleased to join you today in support of the 
nomination of Dr. Melanie Egorin as the Assistant Secretary for 
Legislation at the Department of Health and Human Services. It 
is a testament to the exceptional talents of the Ways and Means 
Committee staff. And I must tell you, there is not anybody in 
Washington who believes that more than I do, now that I am here 
for the second time and have the pleasure of appearing before 
you to introduce another esteemed member of what I call the 
Ways and Means family for a position in the Biden 
administration.
    Dr. Egorin has served as a valued member of the Ways and 
Means Committee staff for 8 years. And it is on the basis of my 
personal knowledge of that service that I can, without 
reservation, attest to her professionalism, diligence, 
commitment, and intellect. And I encourage you all to support 
her nomination.
    Dr. Egorin currently serves as Deputy Staff Director of the 
Ways and Means Subcommittee on Health and also serves as a 
professional staff member for the Select Revenue Measures 
Subcommittee. As the lead staffer covering the Affordable Care 
Act policies and implementation, the Medicare Advantage 
Program, private health coverage, and other health-related 
issues, she has developed an incredible breadth of subject 
matter expertise that will aid her in this new leadership role 
at HHS.
    Over the years, Dr. Egorin has spearheaded the development 
of several policies that became law. But her steadfast 
diligence to protect the Affordable Care Act is arguably one of 
her many achievements, if not the most important, as a staff 
member in her time on Capitol Hill. She possesses an undeniable 
passion for ensuring that all Americans have access to 
affordable, quality health care. Even when working on issues 
that can invite partisan disagreements, Dr. Egorin consistently 
conducts herself with integrity and respect for those who hold 
different views.
    She likely cultivated this even-handed professionalism 
during her time as a senior analyst at the nonpartisan 
Government Accountability Office. It is an attribute that will 
serve her well at HHS as she works with individuals on both 
sides of the aisle, both maximizing existing relationships and 
developing new ones.
    It is also worth noting that, in addition to her 
professional responsibilities, Dr. Egorin also takes time to 
mentor young Capitol Hill staff. In a quiet and meaningful way, 
her commitment to cultivating the next generation of health 
policy experts exemplifies her passion for her work and her 
dedication to ensuring a pipeline of thoughtful leaders in the 
field. I am very confident this morning that Dr. Egorin will 
carry this genuine enthusiasm and sense of purpose with her to 
the Department of Health and Human Services. I have no doubt 
that, as usual, she will excel in her new role. She will be an 
honorable and effective representative for HHS to this 
Congress, and I urge this committee to advance her nomination.
    And thank you, Mr. Chairman.
    The Chairman. Chairman Neal, thanks so much for coming and 
for your kind words about Dr. Egorin. Suffice it to say, I 
probably know as well as anybody on earth that you have your 
hands full these days. We look forward to talking often in the 
days ahead as we tackle, particularly, the biggest economic 
challenges that are in front of us. We will excuse you at this 
time, and I suspect that you will be following the proceedings, 
and I look forward to working with you.
    Representative Neal. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
    The Chairman. We are going to have a very busy next couple 
of hours, I would say to our nominees, because we have votes 
scheduled. Senator Crapo, in his usual gracious way, works to 
try to keep everything moving, and so it is my intention to try 
to get all your opening statements in first. Then we have some 
procedural kind of requirements, as you know. And let us just 
go with Ms. Bianchi for your opening statement, and Mr. White 
with your opening statement, and then Dr. Egorin with your 
opening statement. And then we will get on with the procedures 
and have questions.
    So, Ms. Bianchi, welcome.

   STATEMENT OF SARAH BIANCHI, NOMINATED TO BE DEPUTY UNITED 
    STATES TRADE REPRESENTATIVE (ASIA, AFRICA, INVESTMENT, 
 SERVICES, TEXTILES, AND INDUSTRIAL COMPETITIVENESS), WITH THE 
    RANK OF AMBASSADOR, EXECUTIVE OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT, 
                         WASHINGTON, DC

    Ms. Bianchi. Thank you, Chair Wyden. Good morning. My name 
is Sarah Bianchi, and I live in Arlington, VA with my husband 
Grant Vinik, who is here with me today, and our two children, 
ages 10 and 12.
    I am honored to be with you here today as you consider my 
nomination for Deputy United States Trade Representative with a 
portfolio including Asia, Africa, and areas of services and 
investments. If confirmed, I will proudly serve with a strong 
team Ambassador Tai has put together to help our country emerge 
stronger from the pandemic and, as President Biden says, to 
build back better.
    Throughout my career, as you mentioned, I focused on 
increasing American competitiveness through a wide range of 
domestic and economic policies. I co-led the policy process for 
President Obama's 2012 State of the Union Address, which 
included global tax policies and manufacturing initiatives to 
boost wages and improve career opportunities for American 
workers.
    From 2011 to 2014, I served as the Director of Economic and 
Domestic Policy for then-Vice President Biden. Our work focused 
on the contributing factors and potential solutions to stop the 
loss of manufacturing jobs in the United States. And I helped 
lead extensive research and policy work that informed the 2014 
report of the Vice President's office entitled ``Ready to Work: 
Job-Driven Training and American Opportunity,'' which 
identified several ways to help workers compete in today's 
global economy.
    As a senior advisor at the Biden Institute, I worked on 
issues to make America more competitive in the global economy, 
including on trade. And as a member of the Biden-Harris 
transition team, I led the domestic policy response to COVID. 
At the time, the pandemic was exposing the supply chain 
vulnerabilities in the American economy.
    I was pleased to see the administration launch a trade 
strike force chaired by Ambassador Tai to combat unfair trade 
practices and increase the resiliency of our supply chain. And 
I look forward to supporting Ambassador Tai's work on this 
critical issue.
    This administration has been clear about the commitment to 
making necessary investments at home and working with allies to 
address challenges posed by China. We must have a coordinated 
and coherent approach that restores the necessary balance to 
our trade and economic relationships. All too often, the review 
and development of trade policy is separated from the work of 
creating a competitive economy that will last. I believe they 
must be intricately linked. I share President Biden's and 
Ambassador Tai's commitment to developing a worker-centered 
trade policy that encourages a race to the top so that we can 
build back better.
    Giving workers a seat at the table will be essential as we 
develop policy. Ambassador Tai said earlier this month in a 
speech at the AFL-CIO that, quote, ``By bringing workers from 
all backgrounds and experiences to the table, we will create an 
inclusive trade policy that advances economic security and 
racial and gender equity.''
    Hearing workers' stories, their experiences, and 
perspectives will give us a better understanding of how trade 
has impacted their lives, and how we can lift up communities 
and individuals that have for too long been overlooked. This 
approach will also guide our review of negotiations initiated 
by the previous administration. Ambassador Tai has also been 
clear that any path forward will be done with consultation with 
Congress. And that is exactly what members of Congress, 
including those on this committee, saw firsthand with the 
United States-Mexico-Canada Agreement.
    USMCA is one of the most pro-worker trade agreements ever 
implemented because workers had a seat at the negotiating 
table. It is the new template that we must use for all future 
trade agreements and negotiations. This approach is essential 
to America's competitiveness in the 21st century, and it must 
be part of a comprehensive vision for the United States in the 
global economy.
    I have been fortunate to work with leaders who care deeply 
about America's workers and, if confirmed, I will work with 
Ambassador Tai and the dedicated public servants at USTR to 
create an inclusive trade policy that brings everyone along.
    Thank you for considering my nomination, and I look forward 
to answering your questions.
    [The prepared statement of Ms. Bianchi appears in the 
appendix.]
    The Chairman. Ms. Bianchi, thank you.
    Mr. White, you certainly have some sense of what is 
required of you for the next 5 minutes, so please proceed.

  STATEMENT OF JAYME RAY WHITE, NOMINATED TO BE DEPUTY UNITED 
 STATES TRADE REPRESENTATIVE (WESTERN HEMISPHERE, EUROPE, THE 
    MIDDLE EAST, LABOR, AND ENVIRONMENT), WITH THE RANK OF 
 AMBASSADOR, EXECUTIVE OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT, WASHINGTON, DC

    Mr. White. Thank you. And thank you for your kind words.
    Chair Wyden, Ranking Member Crapo, and members of the 
committee, I am honored to be here at the desk in front of you. 
This is a special moment for me, having spent many years behind 
you on the dais.
    I came to Washington in 2000 to work for my hometown 
Congressman, Jim McDermott. With a decade of service to 
Congressman McDermott, I helped guide his work on trade policy 
as a member of the House Committee on Ways and Means, and I 
learned valuable lessons about how trade impacts workers.
    I grew up in West Seattle, which is on the waterfront and 
home to the Port of Seattle, which is a gateway of 
international trade. The region is home to everything from 
trains to trucks to container ships to grain containers, all of 
which represent the hopes and dreams of workers, farmers, and 
families.
    I have never forgotten where I came from and the people I 
grew up with. I am very aware of how policy made here in 
Washington, DC has a direct impact on the lives of people back 
in West Seattle, back in the other Washington, and around the 
world. If confirmed as Deputy United States Trade 
Representative, I will continue to fight for American workers, 
fight for the environment, and fight for our economic future.
    President Biden and Ambassador Tai have laid out a historic 
new trade policy approach centered around workers. 
Historically, trade, labor, and regulatory policy has been 
tilted in favor of corporations and the wealthy. Workers have 
not always benefited from government policy. The promises some 
made regarding trade agreements often did not reach the factory 
floor and wages did not go up, creating deep skepticism about 
the efficacy and the approach of American trade policy.
    Ambassador Tai believes we need a different approach that 
gives workers a seat at the table, so their perspectives and 
voices are incorporated into the policy that we develop. Recent 
history shows that this approach can bear fruit. Next week 
marks the 1-year anniversary of the entry into force of the 
United States-Mexico-
Canada Agreement, or the USMCA.
    The USMCA proved that bringing all stakeholders to the 
table--labor, workers, business, and members of Congress--can 
produce stronger trade agreements. The result is a bipartisan 
trade agreement with overwhelming support from Congress that 
includes three highlights I would like to focus on.
    One, strong and enforceable labor and environmental 
standards, something that a lot of us have fought for for more 
than 25 years. It includes a new tool known as the rapid 
response mechanism that, when used, allows us to promptly raise 
concerns with the Mexican and Canadian Governments when there 
are allegations of worker rights violations. As you all know, 
this mechanism is derived from the hard work of Senators Brown 
and Wyden. Finally, one of the highlights is that the agreement 
includes necessary and long-overdue intellectual property 
reforms to increase access to life-saving medications.
    I worked with Ambassador Tai during the USMCA negotiations 
while she worked for the House Committee on Ways and Means. We 
were counterparts. When she talks about putting workers front 
and center in our trade policy, it is not shallow rhetoric. It 
is a genuine commitment to lift up voices in communities we do 
not often hear from.
    That commitment was highlighted last week when Ambassador 
Tai and members of the Biden-Harris administration negotiated a 
resolution with the European Union and the United Kingdom to 
end the long-running Boeing-Airbus dispute. The deal suspends 
the tariffs related to the dispute for 5 years and will help 
American workers and American companies compete fairly while we 
work with our allies to confront China and other nonmarket 
economies.
    Being from Seattle, this welcome news hits close to home. 
But I also know that many of the workers who will benefit from 
the deal are your constituents. You and your staff hear from 
them frequently, and you know how difficult this dispute has 
been. They should know that the deal shows how we can work with 
our allies and trading partners to confront the threats of this 
new age, and shape trade policies that lift up workers, lift up 
people in communities that have too long been overlooked.
    If confirmed, I look forward to working with all of you to 
develop a worker-centered trade policy that boosts our 
competitiveness and creates good-paying jobs. Together, we can 
prove that trade does not need to exclude certain factions and 
communities. It can be inclusive, create shared prosperity, and 
help us build back better.
    Thank you for considering me for this position, and I look 
forward to succinctly answering your questions.
    [The prepared statement of Mr. White appears in the 
appendix.]
    The Chairman. Mr. White, thank you.
    Dr. Egorin, welcome.

   STATEMENT OF MELANIE ANNE EGORIN, Ph.D., NOMINATED TO BE 
 ASSISTANT SECRETARY FOR LEGISLATION, DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND 
                 HUMAN SERVICES, WASHINGTON, DC

    Dr. Egorin. Chairman Wyden, Ranking Member Crapo, members 
of the Senate Finance Committee, thank you for considering my 
nomination to be the Assistant Secretary for Legislation at the 
Department of Health and Human Services. I also want to thank 
Chairman Neal for the gracious introduction.
    It is my honor to be nominated by President Biden to serve 
as the Assistant Secretary for Legislation under Secretary 
Becerra. As someone who has worked for the Federal Government 
on Capitol Hill and at the GAO for more than 15 years, it is 
especially humbling to sit before you today.
    I approach this position and our conversation with humility 
and a commitment to serving the American people. I am the 
daughter of a physician scientist who brought his collaborators 
home for dinner, and took his children to academic meetings. I 
grew up surrounded by my father and his colleagues, whose 
students were working to treat and understand cancer. They 
never forgot that each data point in their research was a 
person with loved ones also impacted by the disease.
    When I began my own career working with women with HIV, I 
saw how researchers and stakeholders use evidence grounded in 
the patient experience to advance policy and address health 
equity. My commitment to this approach and these issues is what 
brought me to Federal service, and what remains the core 
principle behind my time here.
    Throughout my 25-year career in health policy, the people 
helped and hurt by the health-care system are my cornerstone: 
my student working to complete his undergraduate degree while 
caring for his elderly grandparents; the nurse visiting 
Medicare beneficiaries to make their home safe; the patient 
diagnosed with end-stage renal disease at 23 while serving in 
the Army; the 15-year-old boy with the preexisting condition 
and his mother advocating to make sure that his treatments are 
covered by insurance; and the coal mine workers on the 
precipice of losing health coverage. I carry their voices with 
me and remember their stories when I do my work.
    The role of Assistant Secretary for Legislation is a unique 
intersection of responsiveness and collaboration between the 
executive and legislative branches of government. Working in 
Congress and GAO, I have seen firsthand how important this role 
is.
    If I am fortunate enough to be confirmed, I will bring my 
breadth and depth of policy knowledge and experience to be as 
transparent and accountable as I can. I approach policy 
development and implementation from a pragmatic position that 
is filled with hope and the belief that we can do better.
    From my experience at GAO and my time with the Committee on 
Ways and Means, I understand the importance of taking a 
bipartisan, bicameral approach to policymaking, and I recognize 
the importance of asking questions about current policies and 
programs to build on them and improve the health of our Nation 
and our health-care system.
    I want to thank Chairman Neal and the members of the Ways 
and Means Committee, and the numerous Representatives and 
Senators who have allowed me to work on their behalf and with 
their staffs to craft policies that make our health-care system 
better in very large, but also very small ways.
    My colleagues--the current and former Hill staff across the 
aisle and across the Capitol--thank you for working with me. We 
may not always agree on policy specifics, but we have 
consistently found ways to move forward on behalf of the 
American people.
    If confirmed, I look forward to continuing to work with 
members and their staff in this collaborative manner. The 
Department of Health and Human Services faces a broad range of 
challenges, from expanding health coverage, to caring for our 
children and seniors, to supporting innovation and scientific 
advancement while responding to and recovering from COVID-19, 
which exposed many of the inequities I have worked to address 
throughout my career.
    I appreciate the opportunity that this administration has 
to work with Congress to tackle these challenges in a 
meaningful way. Given the impact that the Department has on the 
Nation's health and economy, if confirmed, I look forward to 
continuing to serve the American people.
    As I conclude my testimony, I want to thank my spouse, 
Brian Tarleton, for building a life together that honors what 
is important to both of us, and our children Atticus and 
Lorelei, for challenging me and forcing me to think about new 
ideas every day. My mother, Karen Egorin Yaker, who joins me 
today, and my late father, Merrill Jon Egorin, would often 
admonish me and my brother that our actions reflect our 
upbringing. I hope my actions to date, and if I am confirmed to 
be Assistant Secretary for Legislation, will reflect their 
strong belief in valuing diversity of thought and experience in 
solving problems, as well as using one's knowledge, heart, and 
hard work to make the world better.
    Senators, I am happy to answer your questions today and, if 
confirmed as the Assistant Secretary for Legislation at the 
Department of Health and Human Services, for many years in the 
future.
    [The prepared statement of Dr. Egorin appears in the 
appendix.]
    The Chairman. Dr. Egorin, thank you very much for your 
statement. And now I have some obligatory questions I am going 
to ask of each of you before we turn to member questions.
    First, is there anything that you are aware of in your 
background that might present a conflict of interest with the 
duties of the office to which you have been nominated? We will 
just go down the row for each one of the questions, starting 
with you, Ms. Bianchi.
    Ms. Bianchi. No.
    The Chairman. Mr. White?
    Mr. White. No.
    The Chairman. Dr. Egorin?
    Dr. Egorin. No.
    The Chairman. Second, do you know of any reason, personal 
or otherwise, that would in any way prevent you from fully and 
honorably discharging the responsibilities of the office to 
which you have been nominated? Ms. Bianchi?
    Ms. Bianchi. No.
    The Chairman. Mr. White?
    Mr. White. No.
    The Chairman. Dr. Egorin?
    Dr. Egorin. No.
    The Chairman. Third, do you agree, without reservation, to 
respond to any reasonable summons to appear and testify before 
any duly constituted committee of the Congress if you are 
confirmed?
    Ms. Bianchi. Yes.
    Mr. White. Yes.
    Dr. Egorin. Yes.
    The Chairman. Finally, do each of you commit to provide a 
prompt response in writing to any questions addressed to you by 
any Senator of this committee?
    Dr. Egorin. Yes.
    Mr. White. Yes. And I would underline ``prompt.''
    The Chairman. Very good.
    Ms. Bianchi. Yes.
    The Chairman. As I indicated--and I appreciate all the 
nominees' responses for the record--I am going to try to do 
everything I can to keep this moving. It is going to be a bit 
of a juggle, and I will start with my questions.
    Ms. Bianchi, I understand that, if confirmed, you are going 
to be responsible for China policy in your role at USTR. The 
previous administration, in my view, correctly diagnosed in 
some respects China's trade cheating, but it broadly applied 
tariffs as a universal kind of cure-all. To date, that strategy 
has not done a whole lot to change China's behavior.
    The Phase One deal, for example, provided pretty marginal 
improvements. China's exports continue to expand. American 
workers, consumers, and businesses continue to face hardship. 
All in all, it seems that Chinese companies have simply built 
the tariff into their cost of doing business.
    So my question to you is, if confirmed, how would you 
ensure that tariffs are more targeted and more effective at 
putting pressure on China to get them to actually change their 
behavior?
    Ms. Bianchi. Well, thank you for the question, Senator. And 
I agree absolutely with the premise of your statement, that the 
diagnosis was correct, but the execution was not always.
    As I understand it, at the suggestion of Senator Portman, 
the USTR is doing a top-to-bottom review of all of the China 
policy and tariffs, and really so that we can--or the 
administration can come up with a more effective strategy, both 
of enforcing existing opportunities and exploring where there 
are gaps, and that is something that I would look forward to 
working with you and this committee and the entire 
administration on, if I am confirmed.
    The Chairman. Now, recognizing that the China review is 
ongoing--and certainly no one can foreordain what the results 
will be--will you commit to brief the committee within 15 days 
on the administration's conclusion of its China review on 
expected next steps, and any shift in U.S.-China policy?
    Ms. Bianchi. Absolutely.
    The Chairman. Thank you.
    Now, as you and I have talked about, I continue to be very 
concerned about China's digital practices, including censorship 
and their theory of what I call ``digital sovereignty,'' the 
idea that the Chinese Government can control the version of the 
Internet that its citizens can access. China's views are 
really, in my view, a combination of protectionism and 
authoritarianism. These assaults on an open Internet not only 
quell free expression in China and abroad, but in my view are 
blatantly anticompetitive. The Chinese Government is notorious 
for restricting access to American websites and services 
through the Great Firewall, leaving space basically for their 
home-grown competitors to grow. Perhaps more alarming is the 
fact that other regions are following China's lead in this 
hugely important economic space, which could result in a less 
open, less free, less democratic Internet.
    Can you talk about how the United States can work to 
counter China's digital authoritarianism and anticompetitive 
digital practices?
    Ms. Bianchi. Absolutely. And I could not agree more with 
your diagnosis. It is a real challenge for the United States, I 
think. First of all, I look forward to getting into the 
building and really understanding granularly some of these 
types of manipulations that are currently going on, and how we 
might stop them. But I also think, Senator, as we discussed, 
that this is a really good opportunity to work with our allies. 
And I think there is a lot of potential, in digital trade in 
particular, to work with allies and to set a standard that 
forces China to change some of its behavior. And that is what I 
would want to work with you on.
    The Chairman. One last question for you on this round, Ms. 
Bianchi, and then we have the good fortune of Senator 
Whitehouse being here helping with this juggling act that we 
are going to be involved in over the next couple of hours--and 
I thank my friend from Rhode Island for helping out in this 
way.
    Ms. Bianchi, let me turn to another area that is hugely 
important to those kinds of opportunities for high-skill, high-
wage jobs, and that is science and technology. Millions of 
Americans work in this field. It is often euphemistically 
described as ``services.'' I like to translate it into what it 
means for my community, and that is high-skill, high-wage jobs. 
And we have millions of Americans employed in this service 
sector that focuses, in my view, on things like science and 
tech.
    In 2019, U.S. cross-border exports of services measured 
$876 billion. It generated a surplus of $287 billion. So this 
is really a trampoline for revitalizing manufacturing, 
reexamining our supply chains for goods, and also it is a field 
unto itself. At the same time, trade in digital services and 
the movement of consumer data raise a broad range of privacy, 
national security, and other issues.
    How do you think USTR should promote trade in science, 
technology, and other services while promoting security and 
privacy for all Americans?
    Ms. Bianchi. That is a great question. And I think a lot of 
the investments that you all are working on at a bipartisan 
level up here in the Senate are an important part of leveling 
the playing field and raising our own game here. I think that 
we also need to look at supply chain security, and issues 
around the strength of our supply chain in particular.
    I was heartened to see the President's report reviewing all 
of those issues and giving the USTR an important assignment 
there as well, with regard to the trade strike force, which I 
think is a part of, again, a comprehensive--this is something 
that is administration-wide.
    The Chairman. One quick question, because I am over my 
time, for you, Mr. White. Tell the committee how you believe 
the rapid response mechanism that you described will improve 
outcomes for workers in both the United States and Mexico?
    Mr. White. That mechanism is not just strictly an 
enforcement mechanism. It is intended to be cooperative with 
Mexico and with Canada. But the bottom line is, it is fast. It 
is rapid. In the past, trade disputes have lasted for years, 
and workers were left in limbo. And the rapid response 
mechanism is intended to protect workers, to help workers as 
quickly as possible.
    And I am encouraged by the fact that there are two 
investigations underway. There was some skepticism about 
interagency processes, but with USTR co-leading the Interagency 
Labor Group with DOL, not only have we seen that they have 
launched one case, but they self-initiated the case too. So I 
am encouraged by the implementation of the rapid response 
mechanism.
    The Chairman. So we have two cases, in effect, in motion. 
Mr. White, can you commit, after the completion of the first 
two cases, to briefing Congress on the actual real-world 
impacts the process has for workers in Mexico?
    Mr. White. Yes.
    The Chairman. Very good.
    Senator Whitehouse, thank you, and I am going to run.
    Senator Whitehouse. Mr. Chairman, I have not voted either, 
and I think we are both being summoned to the vote. Rather than 
ask my questions and expect answers, if I could just take a 
moment on questions for the record? I just want to alert Ms. 
Bianchi that Rhode Island is the original home of the textile 
industry, and I will have questions for the record for you 
regarding textiles.
    Mr. White, in your environment role, it is going to be very 
important to us to see international ocean plastic work move 
forward off the bipartisan support that we have had in the 
Senate with Save Our Seas 2.0, and I will pursue those 
questions for the record with you.
    And, Dr. Egorin, as Medicare approaches its 2024 deadline, 
delivery system reform is going to be more important than ever. 
The success of Accountable Care Organizations is going to be 
more important than ever, and I in particular have a subset of 
that for patients nearing the end of life to provide better 
support to those families and those patients that I am asking 
CMMI to approve. And I will pursue that with you, again in 
questions for the record, given our timing, Mr. Chairman.
    The Chairman. I thank Senator Whitehouse. You've got a 
sense of what we are juggling. So the committee will stand in a 
brief recess until we get additional Senators back, and I thank 
you all for your patience.
    [Whereupon, a brief recess was taken.]
    Senator Grassley [presiding]. This is an awful way to treat 
you, that I am in Judiciary and then I go vote, and everybody 
else goes to vote, and we do not get to hear what you tell 
everybody else, or even your opening statements. So here I go.
    I want to talk about Mexico, Mr. White. Last month when 
Ambassador Tai appeared before the committee, I asked for her 
commitment to address Mexico's failure to issue biotech import 
approvals, and its decree to phase out imports of biotech corn 
for human consumption.
    I was pleased to see Ambassador Tai emphasize the 
importance of science and risk-based regulatory approaches in 
her conversations during the USMCA Free Trade Commission 
meeting. As Deputy USTR, are you of the same frame of mind to 
be able to commit to enforcing USMCA's SPS and biotechnology 
provisions to prevent disruptions to North American grain 
market and on-farm innovation?
    Mr. White. Yes. And if confirmed, I look forward to working 
with my potential colleagues at USTR, with Secretary Vilsack's 
team at USDA, to address this issue.
    Senator Grassley. Okay.
    My next question is to Ms. Bianchi. Earlier this month the 
Senate passed the U.S. Innovation and Competition Act that 
establishes a new exclusion process for products impacted by 
section 301 tariffs. The U.S. Innovation and Competition Act 
will hopefully be signed by the President, but until then, U.S. 
consumers and companies are being negatively impacted by these 
tariffs.
    My question is, it has now been over 6 months since the 
President has been in office. Will you be a voice within the 
administration to support retroactive extension of 301 tariff 
exclusions and offer another opportunity for exclusion 
applications?
    Ms. Bianchi. Thanks for the question, Senator, and I know 
how important the issue is, and how a lot of companies are 
really feeling pain. As I understand it, there is an up-and-
down review going on over at USTR at the request of Senator 
Portman, and I think that looks very much at the exclusion 
process, including retroactively. So I am very curious to see 
how that is going and underway, and I look forward to working 
to provide the relief these companies need.
    Senator Grassley. Yes. I think I have--continuing, but not 
a specific question--I think I picked up some attitude within 
the administration that there might not be a review of it. Can 
you confirm that? Or would my----
    Ms. Bianchi. Of the exclusion process? Oh, yes----
    Senator Grassley. That there might be some opposition to 
review.
    Ms. Bianchi. My understanding, Senator, is that the up-and-
down--the top-to-bottom review on all of China very much 
includes the exclusion process and will go forward very much 
with an open mind. That is my understanding, obviously.
    Senator Grassley. So then they could be granted again, is 
what you're saying?
    Ms. Bianchi. Potentially, yes; that's my understanding.
    Senator Grassley. To Mr. White, lumber prices have 
skyrocketed to the point of the figure we read about: a $36,000 
increase in cost for a single-family home. While there have 
been some improvements, most analysts are saying that lumber 
will more than double its historic norms for the foreseeable 
future. And now the Department of Commerce has stated that they 
will increase the tariffs on softwood lumber to 18 percent, 
making it even worse.
    So would you agree that increasing tariffs will hurt 
American consumers who are faced with markets where supply 
cannot keep up with demand?
    Mr. White. Thanks for the question, Senator. The softwood 
lumber dispute that we have had with Canada has been decades 
long. Over the course of that dispute, we have had agreements 
at some time, and we do not currently have an agreement. The 
challenge that I think we have is, Canada has a difficult time 
with a unified position. Western provinces differ from the 
Eastern provinces.
    I have encouraged the Canadians over the years to come to 
the table with serious proposals to review the softwood lumber 
agreement. That really has to happen. American mills are within 
their rights to file anti-dumping duties and to see that they 
are implemented. This is an issue that I would like to see 
negotiated--but to get a better softwood lumber agreement than 
the one that we had previously.
    Senator Grassley. My time is up. I am going to submit two 
questions for answer in writing.
    Senator Crapo [presiding]. Senator Warren?
    Senator Warren. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
    The negotiation and enforcement of trade agreements touches 
everything from jobs and wages to the quality of the air we 
breathe and our ability to combat climate change. And that is 
why strong labor and environmental standards should be at the 
heart of every piece of our trade policy. But for decades, both 
workers and environmentalists have been shut out of U.S. trade 
policy, while big corporations have bought and lobbied their 
way into writing trade rules. If we want trade policy to stop 
undermining our workers and our environment, we need to do more 
than just say the right thing every time Democrats are in 
charge at USTR. We need institutional change.
    Ms. Bianchi, your fellow nominee, Mr. White, is nominated 
to be Deputy USTR for Western Hemisphere, Europe, Middle East, 
Labor, and Environment. Meanwhile, your portfolio is Asia, 
Africa, Outbound and Inbound Investment Services, Textiles, and 
Industrial Competitiveness.
    Ms. Bianchi, that division between the two makes it sound 
like labor and environmental issues are something Mr. White 
does, but that you do not. So let me ask you, are labor and 
environmental issues central to every aspect of your portfolio 
as well?
    Ms. Bianchi. Absolutely. That is what a worker-centered 
trade policy is. It is worker voices at the table in every 
conversation. And I am not sure structurally why it is, but you 
certainly have my commitment. And Jayme and I have discussed 
this as well, that it has to be throughout. And I think that is 
the commitment Ambassador Tai has made. I quoted in my opening 
statement her speech to the AFL-CIO, talking about all of these 
same issues.
    Senator Warren. So thank you. I appreciate that. I 
appreciate your commitment to elevating labor and environmental 
concerns in trade policy. But I remain concerned that you will 
have to work against a structure that silos labor and 
environment from other issues that it clearly intersects with.
    Now, Mr. White, your portfolio actually includes labor and 
environment, but USTR has a poor track record of informing and 
listening to labor and environmental groups. For instance, back 
in 2015 USTR finalized TPP text that its own labor advisory 
committee opposed and tried again in 2018 to blow past labor 
concerns with the new NAFTA until congressional Democrats 
insisted on stronger labor and environmental protections. This 
is not surprising, given that USTR's trade advisory committees 
are dominated by corporate interests.
    So, Mr. White, let me ask you, do you agree that USTR 
should not sign trade deals without fully consulting and 
securing support from labor and environmental groups?
    Mr. White. Thank you for the question. I agree with you 
that labor and environment have been sidelined too long in 
trade agreements, and I have fought for most of my career to 
fix that, including working on the May 10th Agreement of 2007, 
ensuring that that agreement was captured in 2015, and working 
with Ambassador Tai on improving the USMCA by working with 
labor and responding to labor and concerns by environmental 
stakeholders.
    So I pledge to keep elevating that issue, for sure. And I 
think you are right: there has been a culture at USTR where 
some issues are sidelined. We need to fix those--we need to fix 
those issues for American workers.
    Senator Warren. Good. Both of these issues.
    You know, while it is far from enough, USTR at least has 
offices and advisory committees for labor and environmental 
issues. Other important considerations are simply left out of 
the USTR structure altogether. It is clear that the impacts of 
trade are unequally distributed. Bad trade deals like NAFTA, 
and China's entry into the WTO, drove offshoring of 
manufacturing, devastated communities that were reliant on 
those jobs, and disproportionately harmed Black and Brown 
workers. But USTR has no dedicated staff that works on equity 
issues. And it does not conduct detailed analysis of how new 
trade deals might impact different communities differently, 
depending on their characteristics.
    So, Ms. Bianchi, do you agree that regional, racial, and 
gender equity issues are important for trade policy decisions; 
in fact, too important for USTR not to have dedicated staff to 
collect data on them and report on them?
    Ms. Bianchi. I absolutely agree, and I enjoyed our 
conversation yesterday on this, Senator. I think you raised a 
lot of good points about how to use data to make this very 
clear.
    Senator Warren. Good. I very much appreciate this. You 
know, if we want American families to come out ahead on trade 
deals, we need to start by fixing the processes that produce 
rigged outcomes. We need to make sure that corporations are not 
filling all the seats at the table. Labor and environmental 
groups and other representatives of the diverse American 
economy need a voice at the USTR, and we need to make sure that 
they have those seats today, tomorrow, and on into the future. 
These would be big steps towards making trade policy work for 
the American people.
    Thank you very much. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
    Senator Crapo. Thank you, Senator Warren. Do we have any 
Senators online with us who are at their desks, or at the 
camera?
    [No response.]
    Senator Crapo. Hearing no one step up, I will ask my 
questions. I want to just indicate that I will first ask 
unanimous consent that my opening statement be entered into the 
record, and I will not make the statement. And so that will be 
entered into the record, and I will ask a few questions.
    [The prepared statement of Senator Crapo appears in the 
appendix.]
    Senator Crapo. I apologize for not being here so far in the 
hearing. I have been pulled away to other business, and it is 
just one of those busy days.
    My first question is for you, Ms. Bianchi. The 
administration has said that the Trans-Pacific Partnership 
agreement needs to be reevaluated, quote, ``since much has 
changed in the world since TPP was originally signed in 2016.'' 
I am concerned that what has changed in particular is that 
China stands poised to have better market access than the 
United States in the region because China's Regional 
Comprehensive Economic Partnership agreement, or RCEP, is 
advancing toward entry into force.
    What, if any, are the specific developments since 2016 that 
you think have made TPP outdated? And what could be done to 
update TPP disciplines in response to those developments?
    Ms. Bianchi. Well, thanks for the question. And I agree 
with your premise that China is in a much different place. It 
is a much stronger force to be reckoned with for the United 
States, and I think that means we need to double down with our 
allies even more, even though that can be difficult work.
    I think we have to--I am heartened to see that the 
administration has already started the TIFA process with 
Taiwan, but I think we need to have broad-based consultation 
and work with our allies to address the situation with China.
    Senator Crapo. Thank you very much, and I agree with you.
    And, Mr. White, the administration continues to highlight 
that one of its major achievements is the G7 agreement 
regarding the global minimum tax. While there are limited 
details, the G7 press release states that members will remove 
digital service taxes in exchange for the reallocation of 
taxing rights of global companies, in addition to implementing 
a global minimum tax of 15 percent.
    As you may know, I am deeply skeptical of the 
administration's reliance on other countries to enact a 15-
percent global minimum tax. Critically though, I am also deeply 
disappointed that none of the countries have taken any serious 
action to roll back implementation or to suspend collection of 
their digital services tax.
    How do you think the United States should respond if our 
trading partners make no effort to stop collecting the 
discriminatory digital service taxes on U.S. firms?
    Mr. White. Thank you for the question, Senator. There has 
been a bipartisan concern for years about the DSTs. And there 
has also been bipartisan support for an OECD process to come to 
new terms. I look forward, if confirmed, to working with 
Treasury, consulting with you, and determining ways to address 
the DSTs.
    Obviously, there is a backstop, the 301, that many members 
on this committee supported. So that is there. But I look 
forward to consulting with Treasury and USTR to see where 
things actually are. I read the same press release as you did.
    Senator Crapo. Would you agree that we need to insist that 
the elimination of the DSTs be a part of any kind of ultimate 
agreement at the OECD?
    Mr. White. I cannot speak to the Biden administration, but 
the DSTs are obviously discriminatory towards American 
companies.
    Senator Crapo. All right; thank you.
    And for Dr. Egorin, I appreciate the work that you have 
done on the staff of the House Ways and Means Committee and 
your collaboration with Republican House and Senate staff over 
the years. This kind of partnership is particularly important 
during a crisis. We saw this last year when a divided Congress 
and the Trump administration took decisive action early in the 
year to make possible health-care innovations to mitigate the 
pandemic, despite the restrictions imposed by the national 
lockdown.
    As we approach the end of the public health emergency, 
which policy innovations do you think we should retain, and 
potentially make permanent in statute, as we continue to look 
at how to improve our health-care system?
    Dr. Egorin. Thank you for the question, Senator. And the 
work that we did bipartisanly and bicamerally last year showed 
the value of working together on behalf of the American people.
    I think responding to coming into and recovering from the 
COVID-19 pandemic has shown many opportunities for innovation, 
both in terms of how we respond to public health crises, but 
also how we move forward with telehealth, with understanding 
regional health-care differences, as well as access to care and 
equity issues that came to the fore. And I look forward to 
working as we address those, and as we take the lessons learned 
to move our health-care system forward.
    Senator Crapo. Well, thank you. And in the context of 
working together, I will stay with you, Dr. Egorin. While we 
may not always agree on certain policy solutions to the issues 
in our health-care system, the primary responsibility of the 
HHS ASL is to be a conduit of information between the 
Department and Congress. I would appreciate it if you could 
share with us how you are going to work with us in areas where 
we agree, and in those where we do not agree. Will you commit 
to us to always communicate in a timely, clear, and responsive 
way to our inquiries?
    Dr. Egorin. Senator, you have my commitment to be 
responsive, to be transparent, and to be accountable, if 
confirmed to be Assistant Secretary for Legislation. I have 
experienced being in both the majority and the minority, in 
times where the administration was of the same party and of 
different parties, and there have always been challenges. So I 
look forward to building and moving forward.
    Senator Crapo. Well, thank you. And I think your record 
shows that.
    I am told that Senator Casey is with us remotely. Senator 
Casey, are you there?
    Senator Casey. Yes; thank you, Senator Crapo. I appreciate 
this opportunity. I know everyone has been in and out today, so 
I apologize for being late.
    I wanted to direct a question first to Sarah Bianchi. Ms. 
Bianchi, I appreciate that you raised supply chain 
vulnerabilities in your testimony. We have seen too clearly, 
over the last year especially, the cost of relying upon China, 
which of course is a nonmarket economy, for the Nation's 
critical capabilities with respect to a number of items, but in 
particular personal protective equipment. And I do not think we 
ever want to be in such a vulnerable position, a dependent 
position, again as we were in 2020.
    We have very little visibility on these vulnerabilities 
that may exist with respect to production dependencies in other 
sectors. The good news is, we have a group, a bipartisan group 
of Senators, working on this. Senator Cornyn, Senator Stabenow, 
and I have a proposal to increase visibility on vulnerable 
supply chains. We want to review outbound investment of 
critical capabilities to foreign adversaries and nonmarket 
economies like China and focus on those countries, not every 
country, in order to assess and address dependencies and 
vulnerabilities in our critical supply chains.
    So can you provide for me your views on this proposal and 
the role it can play regarding our Nation's overall strategy to 
secure supply chains for these critical capabilities?
    Ms. Bianchi. Well, thanks, Senator, for the question. And I 
100-percent agree. The supply chain vulnerability is something 
I had the opportunity to work on around the domestic COVID 
response for the transition, and the presidential transition, 
and I saw firsthand really what we were up against. And we 
cannot have that happen again.
    I think that what the administration has done with the 
executive order is also a good start. And I think your proposal 
is a really interesting idea. And if I am confirmed, I would 
like to understand it better. I think it raises a really 
important issue on outbound investments, and I would love to 
learn more about it if I am fortunate enough to be confirmed.
    Senator Casey. I very much look forward to working with you 
and your team. I appreciate the validation of how important 
this issue is.
    I will turn next to Mr. White. This is a question about 
China. I do not have to restate for anyone the challenges we 
face regarding China. We have to, of course, work with allies 
to address many of these challenges. Many of those issues fall 
within your own portfolio, including by way of countries, the 
UK and then the broader EU countries.
    Can you discuss how you intend to engage with our allies on 
issues of mutual concern, especially in the context of China, 
and how you will work with your fellow deputies to ensure 
coordination with respect to engagement, and also outcomes?
    Mr. White. Thank you for the question. This is an important 
and very confounding issue. There are so many issues with 
respect to China and over-capacity that we have to deal with. 
And I am just briefly reminded of the field hearing you hosted 
in Pittsburgh a few years ago on over-capacity and its effects 
on steelworkers. And the turnout that you had was great, and it 
was also delightful that you got a call from Secretary Ross 
right before you launched the hearing to talk about the 
importance of dealing with China and addressing worker problems 
as a result.
    President Biden has made clear that he wants to work with 
our allies to deal with China. And I think there has been some 
encouraging news since the administration has been in place. 
Ambassador Tai, for example, has been to Europe, and there have 
been some good outcomes. Boeing-Airbus is encouraging.
    So I would intend, if confirmed, to consult with my 
colleagues at USTR and at Commerce, and try to form alliances 
and form solutions that obtain results for American workers and 
address the problems we have with over-capacity, especially in 
China.
    Senator Casey. Well, thanks very much. Thank you, Senator 
Crapo.
    The Chairman. Senator Young, I gather that you are out in 
cyber-space and----
    Senator Young. I am indeed, Mr. Chairman. Thank you so 
much.
    The Chairman. Go ahead.
    Senator Young. And of course, thank you to our nominees for 
their willingness to serve and appear before the committee 
today.
    Our economic health and national security are of course 
closely intertwined, and both play vital roles in constructing 
parameters for trade agreements. With China's growing influence 
becoming pervasive globally, the United States should be 
proactive in developing trade relationships.
    China's actions to isolate and manipulate countries in the 
Asia-Pacific region are concerning, to say the least. And the 
United States can counter this agenda by offering counsel, 
support, and opportunities for trade agreements of mutual 
benefit.
    Ms. Bianchi, I understand that Asia will be a part of your 
portfolio, if confirmed. Do you see potential in the United 
States becoming more involved in the Asia-Pacific region, 
particularly as it relates to establishing better trading 
relationships with countries that might be susceptible to 
China's unfair trade practices?
    Ms. Bianchi. Absolutely, Senator. We need to be more 
involved. I think that President Biden has been very clear that 
we need to work more with our allies. That absolutely extends 
to trade. I think I am encouraged to see that Secretary Blinken 
mentioned already the importance of the relationship with 
Taiwan. And I know that Ambassador Tai has met with her 
counterpart there, and we are starting a TIFA process, the 
administration is starting a TIFA process already with Taiwan, 
and that is just one example.
    I think we absolutely need to figure out how to work with 
our allies to address the rising challenge of China.
    Senator Young. Well, thank you. I have a related question 
that pertains to digital trade. The USMCA and the U.S.-Japan 
Digital Trade Agreement contain strong provisions on digital 
trade that support economic growth, protect privacy, and allow 
businesses to have stable access to new markets. And I noticed 
that those provisions were supported in a broadly bipartisan 
fashion. Tools like prohibiting forced data transfer, enforcing 
cyber-theft penalties, and removing requirements on 
localization are all key ways to promote integrity in digital 
trade. Countries that do not adhere to these high standards end 
up raising prices and lowering quality for their own citizens, 
while harming American businesses.
    So, Ms. Bianchi, once again maybe you could speak to the 
importance of strong digital trade provisions, and whether you 
believe the USMCA and the U.S.-Japan agreement took the right 
approach to addressing issues surrounding digital trade?
    Ms. Bianchi. Well, as you mentioned, Senator, we have had 
strong bipartisan support for those agreements, so I certainly 
think they provide a good model. And digital trade, absolutely 
I think, is a really important place where we can work with our 
allies to counter the challenge of China.
    I think there is a lot of opportunity, particularly in 
Asia, to build on what we have done, and to do more, I think, 
is one of the top things we should be doing.
    Senator Young. Well, it is my belief that we need to find 
our way back into the trade game, as it were. So I am going to 
now connect the two questions, the lines of inquiry. Trading 
with Asian allies and partners, I think, will be very important 
for the health of our economy and also our national security, 
our collective security of non-CCP nations.
    And so, how might we expand digital trade relationships 
with countries in the Asia-Pacific region?
    Ms. Bianchi. Well, I think we should, and we can. And 
again, I think it is my understanding USTR has already started 
a process with Taiwan. I think we need to look for other 
partners. And I look forward to getting in the building and 
figuring out where the state of these conversations really is, 
if I am confirmed, and really trying to move that ball forward. 
Because I agree with all the connectivities and the connections 
you have drawn there.
    Senator Young. Well, I hope you will consider me a ready 
and willing partner in this particular area of public policy. 
So, thanks so much.
    Ms. Bianchi. Absolutely. Thank you.
    The Chairman. Thank you, Senator Young, and I look forward 
to working with you, particularly on that last matter of 
digital trade.
    Senator Daines is here. He and I, I can tell you, have our 
days consumed by the fact that everybody in the West is 
collectively holding their breath worried about yet another 
inferno visiting their area. We will be working together on 
that.
    Senator Daines, you are recognized for your questions.
    Senator Daines. Mr. Chairman, thank you, and thanks for 
those thoughts as well. You are exactly right.
    Trade, and trade with the Asia-Pacific in particular, is 
critical for Montana farmers and ranchers and jobs throughout 
my State. I spent a fair amount of my private-sector career, 
part of it living in the region and managing the region as 
well, in the software business.
    Trade is also an important tool that supports both our 
economy and our national security. And I really believe that 
working with our allies is key to more effectively countering 
China's growing influence in the region and around the world.
    Ms. Bianchi, with China's growing influence in mind, and 
recent announcements by Ambassador Tai and other administration 
officials regarding the beginning of trade talks and 
discussions with Taiwan, what will be your priorities in that 
specific market?
    Ms. Bianchi. That's a great question. Thank you for the 
question. You know, I think it is really important that we are 
starting the conversation with Taiwan, and I am really glad 
that both Secretary of State Blinken, Anthony Blinken, and 
Ambassador Tai have made this a priority. I think I would not 
want to prejudge it before getting in the building, if I am 
confirmed, to really see where those talks are, but I think 
there are a lot of things we can look at, whether it is digital 
trade, whether it is some of the digital services taxes that 
are concerning, but I think we have to look at all the issues.
    Senator Daines. So, as soon as you begin engagement with 
Taiwan, you are going to get pushback from the PRC.
    Ms. Bianchi. Yes.
    Senator Daines. How will you respond to the pushback you 
are going to get from the PRC?
    Ms. Bianchi. Well, I think we just have to be strong. And 
we have to get our other allies in the region as well to be 
supportive. I think we need to engage all the countries, but 
100 percent I think we have to move forward. It is critical.
    Senator Daines. Yes. And count me as one who, at the time, 
supported TPP. I believed that multilateral approach was very 
strategic as it relates to how we think about China and engage.
    I want to talk about India for a moment. Montana is our 
Nation's number one producer of pulse crops. India is a 
critically important market for our Montana farmers, and 
unfortunately the U.S. pulse crop, as you know, faces 
significant tariffs and barriers to trade.
    Ms. Bianchi, would you commit to engaging with your Indian 
counterparts to help level that playing field for U.S. pulses 
as well as other ag commodities in the India market?
    Ms. Bianchi. Absolutely. I look forward to working with you 
on that.
    Senator Daines. Likewise. As India is also an important 
counterweight, I believe, to China in the Indo-Pacific region, 
what are the challenges and opportunities we might see in that 
market?
    Ms. Bianchi. In the India market?
    Senator Daines. Yes.
    Ms. Bianchi. Yes, I think--well, certainly I know it is 
incredibly important for agricultural and other exports. But I 
know we have also seen challenges, for example on digital 
services taxes. And that is something that--you know, there are 
a lot of complexities of that relationship.
    Senator Daines. You know, the innovation ecosystem that 
India is building out is something we ought to keep an eye on 
too. Their digital--their cryptocurrency transaction is orders 
of magnitude greater than anybody else in the world recently.
    Ms. Bianchi. Right.
    Senator Daines. So they are out in front in a lot of areas. 
So they are sometimes an under-rated power there and an ally 
that we can work closely with.
    Mr. White, American energy independence has not only helped 
to ensure our domestic national security, it has also helped 
our allies in Europe. For example, LNG exports from the United 
States to the EU have risen steeply since that Trump junker 
agreement, with an estimate of 36 percent of U.S. LNG exports 
in 2019 going to the EU.
    Do you believe that it's in the interest of the United 
States and Europe to increase LNG and energy trade?
    Mr. White. Thank you for the question. It is an important 
one, and it has been a topic of discussion for several years as 
we have begun, in the States, to develop infrastructure to 
allow for the export of LNG.
    My understanding is it is the Department of Energy that 
decides whether LNG exports are approved. And they have 
criteria. If confirmed, I will work with the USTR and work with 
DOE to see how they are implementing the Natural Gas Act, and 
how they are promoting the export of LNG.
    Senator Daines. Well, sadly, the Russians have Europe 
addicted to their energy. It is clearly in our best interests, 
and it just shocked many of us when the President canceled the 
Keystone XL Pipeline that reduced CO2 emissions. It 
was a huge win for our rural communities. We can talk about all 
the benefits here with the time I have, but at the same time he 
green-lights the Nord Stream 2 pipeline. If there has ever been 
a win for Putin, it was that. And it has been a great 
disappointment, frankly, and I think, strategically, a major 
mistake.
    Lastly, Mr. Chairman, Trade Promotion Authority is set to 
expire soon. I believe it is important for the administration 
to pursue negotiations to reduce barriers to trade and open 
important markets. And I believe it is critical that we 
reauthorize TPA. I support that and look forward to working 
with both my colleagues on this committee and with you all here 
at the table, if you are confirmed, to get that done. Thank 
you.
    The Chairman. Thank you, Senator Daines. And we will be 
addressing those TPA issues.
    Next is Senator Cortez Masto.
    Senator Cortez Masto. Thank you----
    The Chairman. If she is out there.
    Senator Cortez Masto. I am here.
    The Chairman. Thank you. Good.
    Senator Cortez Masto. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I hope you 
can hear me, okay.
    The Chairman. Yes.
    Senator Cortez Masto. Thank you to the panelists. 
Congratulations on your nominations. Let me start on the trade 
side first, Ms. Bianchi, on the 301 tariff.
    And let me just say, we have had two other committee 
hearings going on, so you may have already addressed the 
question, and so please excuse that, but I was not here to hear 
your response as I was at the other two committee meetings.
    But let me just put this in perspective. The 301 tariffs in 
Nevada have had an impact on our businesses, our workers, and 
our families, particularly on the heels of also grappling with 
COVID-19 and the impact it has had across the State.
    Now, I share the administration's strong commitment to 
holding China accountable for its unfair trade practices, and 
its efforts to craft a robust strategy to confront the broader 
Chinese behaviors. Clearly this is an important issue across 
the country, and that is why the Senate voted 91-4 on a trade 
package in the U.S. Innovation and Competition Act with strong, 
clear language on 301 exclusions.
    I have to say, I appreciated Ambassador Tai for appearing 
before the Senate when she stated that USTR actively was doing 
this and would provide more details as soon as they can.
    So, Ms. Bianchi, can you speak to where USTR is in its 
review and decision process on 301 tariffs and exclusions?
    Ms. Bianchi. Well, thank you for the question, Senator, and 
I really appreciate that this is a challenge for many 
businesses in Nevada and throughout the country. And so I 
appreciate that.
    As I understand it, at the request of Senator Portman there 
is a top-to-bottom review of all China trade issues, including 
the exclusion process, which is very important, as Ambassador 
Tai communicated. And if confirmed, I really want to understand 
exactly where the state of that review is and look forward to 
reporting back as quickly as we can, because I know how 
important it is.
    Senator Cortez Masto. I appreciate that, and thank you.
    Mr. White, 232 tariffs. I continue to hear the same thing 
from businesses in my home State about the impact that some of 
the tariffs are having on their industry. What are your 
thoughts on the path forward for 232? How do you plan to work 
with Congress on that, if nominated?
    Mr. White. Thank you for the question. I have heard 
firsthand from constituents from Oregon about their concerns as 
to how the 232 process has been implemented. The goal behind 
the 232 was well-intended, but I think the execution of the 232 
tariffs has been poor.
    And if confirmed, I look forward to working with my 
potential colleagues in Commerce, in consultation with the USTR 
and the White House, to have more of a program that has more 
integrity behind it.
    Senator Cortez Masto. Thank you. I appreciate the answer.
    Dr.--is it E-gor-an? Is that the right pronunciation?
    Dr. Egorin. It is, Senator.
    Senator Cortez Masto. Thank you. You will be responsible 
for coordinating policy across HHS divisions. I am curious how 
you will ensure that materials for the Hill are reflective of 
cooperation across those divisions. And then also, how can the 
Hill best engage the administration early in the process?
    Dr. Egorin. As you are aware, the executive branch is wide-
reaching, and often a lot of the work that is done within the 
Department of HHS is coordinated across departments, and that 
sometimes leads to challenges in being responsive and timely.
    It is my commitment to be responsive, to work with my 
colleagues to make sure that information is returned, through 
technical assistance and other responses, in a timely fashion.
    In terms of working in a more proactive position, having 
worked at the Committee on Ways and Means, and with members of 
the Senate for almost a decade, I recognize the frustration of 
getting technical assistance late in the process after policy 
conversations have already begun. So I look forward to working 
with members and their staff earlier to make sure that policy 
objectives of the legislative branch are included and 
understood as we move forward on technical assistance.
    Senator Cortez Masto. Thank you. I appreciate your comments 
today. Congratulations again, as the nominee.
    The Chairman. Thank you, Senator Cortez Masto, and I look 
forward to working with you on important issues like 232. Your 
leadership is much appreciated.
    Next is Senator Toomey.
    Senator Toomey. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
    I think I am going to direct this to Mr. White. During the 
passage and consideration of USMCA, I had a lot of concern 
about the potential for the rapid response labor mechanism to 
essentially be weaponized and have a negative impact on 
American workers and American employers. And I was told not to 
worry about that, this will only apply to Mexican entities. 
Well, now it seems that my fear has been proven to be 
justified. We, right now, have two U.S. companies that I am 
aware of, including one of my constituents--that constituent 
has almost 1,000 employees in the U.S., and they are caught up 
in this labor enforcement mechanism problem. Specifically, they 
are accused of a denial of rights in the Mexican plant.
    They do not believe that they have engaged in any denial of 
rights, but if they inadvertently have done so, they want to 
resolve the problem quickly. Here's the problem. There is no 
way they can. These companies are not being provided any of the 
details about the allegations. A tip was called in privately on 
a USTR DOL hot line. The USTR and DOL investigated, and 
apparently they have determined that there is sufficient 
credible evidence to support the tip, but neither we nor the 
company have any idea what the actual allegation is, much less 
any evidence to support the allegation.
    This is unbelievable. I mean, the only indication that 
exists at all about the nature of the complaint is what the 
complaining union has voluntarily released. So the USTR has 
this denial of rights allegation information. The Mexican 
Government has it. The unions have it. The only party in this 
whole dispute left completely in the dark is the company being 
accused. And you know, they face reputational damage, maybe 
financial implications, if this ends up blocking their ability 
to import their products to their American facilities, which 
jeopardizes the jobs of those American workers.
    This is completely one-sided. And I am very concerned that 
this mechanism is not giving the accused party any opportunity 
to either defend themselves or correct the problem, if there is 
one.
    So, Mr. White, my question is this. My understanding is 
that, as the Deputy U.S. Trade Rep for North America and Labor, 
you will be responsible for overseeing the rapid response labor 
mechanism. And I would hope we can agree that the rapid 
response labor mechanism should lead to resolving the denial of 
rights accusations as quickly as possible, and ideally it would 
be through a settlement where this is resolved prior to going 
through a big, costly adjudication process. But in order for 
that to happen, obviously the accused needs to know what they 
are being accused of.
    So do you agree that the facility who has had a complaint 
filed against it has a right to be informed of the details of 
the complaint?
    Mr. White. Thank you for the question. I had a hand in 
helping to shape the rapid response mechanism, and there are 
consequences under the mechanism that are there to protect 
American workers. But the whole mechanism was designed to 
resolve issues, not to have enforcement actions, but to 
cooperate--well, to first investigate and cooperate with Mexico 
and the facility----
    Senator Toomey. Yes. I've got very little time left and I 
do have another question, so I would be very grateful if you 
could just get to the heart of whether the accused has a right 
to know what they are accused of.
    Mr. White. If confirmed, I would work with my USTR 
colleagues to learn more about the details of this particular 
investigation, and I am happy to come back and report to you as 
to what----
    Senator Toomey. As a general matter, does it sound 
reasonable that someone accused of something should know what 
they are accused of?
    Mr. White. If someone is being investigated--I don't know 
the answer to that question.
    Senator Toomey. Okay, that is worrisome because, you know, 
they have all kinds of risk and they have no way to manage it.
    Let me ask you a follow-up question. One of the concerns is 
the possibility that--and I think the U.S. Trade Rep has 
indicated that this mechanism, this rapid response labor 
mechanism, may be used to address supposed denials of rights 
that happened prior to the USMCA entering into force.
    Is it your understanding that USMCA authorizes the USTR to 
use this mechanism in an ex post facto basis to deal with 
allegations of denials that supposedly happened prior to the 
adoption of the USMCA?
    Mr. White. I think it is warranted to have an investigation 
as to what is going on currently. And if there is evidence that 
there was a denial of rights previously, and that is the test 
of an investigation into what is going on in the facility 
currently, it seems warranted.
    Senator Toomey. Yes, but what I am asking is, if there is a 
violation that is alleged to have occurred in the past and is 
not ongoing, is it the business of the USTR to use this 
mechanism under USMCA to deal with this historical violation?
    Mr. White. Well, if the issue was resolved, that is what 
the investigation would show.
    Senator Toomey. Okay. Well, I hope that is the way it plays 
out. I do have some concerns about this.
    I thank you, Mr. Chairman.
    The Chairman. The time of the gentleman has expired.
    Next is the Senator from Ohio, Senator Brown, who has been 
such a strong advocate for working people for so many years, 
and I believe Senator Brown is out there in cyberspace.
    Senator Brown. I am here.
    The Chairman. And I also want to tell Senator Lankford, who 
has been very patient, we are going in order of entry, and I 
hope we will be able to recognize you very soon.
    Senator Brown?
    Senator Brown. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Thanks to 
Ms. Bianchi and Mr. White. Thank you for your willingness to 
serve in this new USTR. And I say ``new USTR'' in a very 
complimentary, enthusiastic way. And, Dr. Egorin, thank you for 
the missive from Minsk. I appreciate that too--and I think only 
she and my staff know what that means, but thank you for that.
    For the first time in memory--for the first time in memory, 
we finally have an administration that puts workers at the 
forefront, at the center of our trade policy. Ambassador Tai 
was with me a few weeks ago in Cleveland on a remote with 
workers around Ohio--a roundtable actually--to listen to Ohio 
workers. And that is where you start on a trade policy: you 
listen to workers and put them at the center of the trade 
policy. And I am so thankful to the chairman and his then-
assistant Mr. White for the work that they did on Brown-Wyden, 
the difference that is already making for workers.
    I know there is always resistance in this body to putting 
workers first, even to acknowledging workers, except when it 
comes to election time and talking about how much workers like 
candidate A or candidate B. But I am so appreciative of Senator 
Wyden's work, Chairman Wyden's work. And we know that workers 
are our greatest asset. They build the country and have built 
the country.
    I have worked on bipartisan legislation with Senator 
Portman called Level the Playing Field, and we teamed up again 
to introduce a bipartisan Level the Playing Field 2.0 to 
strengthen U.S. trade remedy laws that address the new unfair 
trade practices we have seen. Businesses and workers know too 
well what happens to their jobs when we have a tax policy and 
trade policy that encourages shutting down production in 
Sandusky or Mansfield or Toledo, and collecting tax breaks, 
moving overseas, taking advantage of workers, taking advantage 
of weak or nonexistent or nonenforced environmental laws. And 
we know what happens to our country.
    So I would like to start and ask the Deputy U.S. Trade Reps 
a simple ``yes'' or ``no'' question. Do you believe that 
understanding when and where trade hurts specific workers and 
communities within the United States should be central to any 
potential trade agreement, yes or no? Ms. Bianchi?
    Ms. Bianchi. Yes.
    Senator Brown. And, Mr. White?
    Mr. White. Yes.
    Senator Brown. Okay; thank you. Do you believe we have done 
a good job as a country of understanding these costs for 
workers, and costs to entire communities and regions of the 
country in the past?
    Ms. Bianchi. No.
    Senator Brown. Thank you.
    Mr. White?
    Mr. White. No.
    Senator Brown. Thank you. As I said at the beginning, it is 
a new day in the USTR with Ms. Tai and Ms. Todd and Mr. White 
and Ms. Bianchi, and Dr. Egorin, and what that is going to mean 
for this country.
    The last question--a supplement to it. If called on, would 
any or all of you be willing to come to Ohio to meet with 
workers so you really understand? There is my favorite Abraham 
Lincoln story. He was in the White House, and the staff wanted 
him to stay there, win the war, free the slaves, and preserve 
the Union. And Lincoln said, ``I've got to go out and get my 
public opinion bath,'' because he knew what he was to the 
people. He was a better President.
    So my question is--how can you say ``no'' after this?--when 
called on, would you come and meet with Ohio workers from 
Ashtabula to Cincinnati, from Toledo to Steubenville, all three 
of you? Dr. Egorin?
    Dr. Egorin. Senator, it would be my honor to come to Ohio.
    Senator Brown. Thank you.
    Mr. White?
    Mr. White. Yes, and I have a feeling the follow-up question 
will be, will you drive through Delaware and Pennsylvania on 
your way?
    Senator Brown. Not my follow-up question. [Laughter.]
    Ms. Bianchi?
    Ms. Bianchi. Absolutely.
    Senator Brown. Thank you.
    That's all I have, Mr. Chairman. Thanks, Mr. Chairman, for 
your role, your absolutely affirmative, important, crucial role 
in centering U.S. trade policy around workers. It is really a 
new day in my entire career, and I am thrilled with this panel 
and the work that they are going to do for our country. Thank 
you.
    The Chairman. Thank you, Senator Brown.
    Senator Lankford, I am going to take about 15 seconds to 
just respond in terms of where we are.
    Senator Brown, as you know, one out of four jobs in my home 
State revolves around international trade. And the trade jobs 
often pay better than do the non-trade jobs. And working with 
you has been particularly helpful in showing that you can be 
both pro-trade and pro-enforcement, and that the two are not 
mutually exclusive. You can do both. So I appreciate my 
colleague's leadership.
    Senator Lankford?
    Senator Lankford. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
    Can you two pass on my gratitude to Ambassador Tai as well, 
on working with Taiwan and taking the next step in that? And I 
hope that you will continue to be able to work on the free 
trade agreement with Taiwan in the days ahead.
    I do want to ask both of you a question on this initially. 
And this deals with our relationship with China and what is 
happening currently. Obviously, we are selling a lot of 
commodities to China, but I have a concern because I am not 
hearing USTR talking about a brand new trade agreement. And I 
continue to bring up what new trade agreements we are going 
after. What new countries? And when we sell to China, the more 
that we are exposed to China, if China ever decides they are 
not going to buy this product now, our commodity prices 
collapse in the United States.
    So we are very exposed to them, pending new trade 
agreements in other places. What is your plan to go out and 
pursue new trade agreements in new countries?
    Ms. Bianchi. Well, thanks for the question. It is really 
important. I look forward to getting into the building, if I am 
confirmed, and figuring out where those conversations are, and 
figuring out where the most fruitful opportunities exist.
    I think the progress in Taiwan is important. And there are 
other countries that will be similarly situated.
    Senator Lankford. Mr. White?
    Mr. White. I agree with your sentiment. We have to do all 
we can to open up foreign markets to American exports, 
services, agriculture, manufactured goods. I think that 
sentiment is shared by this new administration.
    In terms of which agreements, I know there are reviews 
going on. There is a review going on as to where things stand 
with the U.S.-UK negotiations. But I think you are absolutely 
right, both in terms of the economics and in terms of our 
competition with China, that it is important to be in the game 
and be fighting for more open markets for American products.
    Senator Lankford. Mr. White, if confirmed, how would you 
engage with the issue of Iran and current sanctions there, 
based on their terrorist activities?
    Mr. White. Thanks for the question. It is a really 
important one. I, if confirmed, would look forward to working 
with my USTR colleagues, Treasury, and the Department of State 
to find the best way forward on Iran to support those efforts.
    Senator Lankford. What would you consider your role in that 
conversation, when asked?
    Mr. White. What the trade aspects are, and what this 
committee thinks.
    Senator Lankford. What about the other nations and how they 
are doing trade with Iran based on sanctions that currently 
exist?
    Mr. White. The answer is the same. I would want to consult 
with Treasury and State to find the most effective, strategic 
way to deal with Iran.
    Senator Lankford. Let me follow up on a question that 
Senator Daines started with you about the export of natural 
gas. That has been exceptionally important, and the Obama 
administration and the Trump administration were both very 
aggressive in working on the export of natural gas, not only 
because it is an American commodity that is great to be able to 
sell in the world market, it is obviously a climate change 
shift as well to be able to provide cleaner-burning natural gas 
all around the world. There was a lean forward in both the 
Obama administration and the Trump administration to look for 
new markets to be able to sell natural gas to. You had 
mentioned before to him that that is for the Department of 
Energy to determine, and that is correct on this, to do the 
final release, but USTR is very dependent on finding new 
markets.
    Would you be aggressively pursuing new markets for natural 
gas?
    Mr. White. If confirmed, I will want to work with my 
colleagues at USTR, and the Department of Energy and others, 
and work with you to determine the best way forward on LNG 
exports.
    Senator Lankford. Okay, the----
    Mr. White. And I know how much--I agree with you and what 
you have said. There was a lot of leaning in in recent years, 
and it has been an issue in Oregon, and an issue elsewhere--not 
a bad issue, it has just been a topic--but, if confirmed, I 
will consult with them and with you.
    Senator Lankford. I am just trying to figure out how you 
are going to counsel people to say this is a commodity that we 
have to sell, just as we have soybeans and other things to be 
able to put on the market. That is a part of a dialogue. It is 
not just an ``I'll consult with other folks.'' You are out 
actually doing the negotiation and engaging in this. This is 
one of the commodities that you are going to actually 
aggressively say, ``We have a product that you should buy.''
    Mr. White. I think this is an important topic. This is not 
just an economic issue, especially with respect to Europe. It 
is a geopolitical issue.
    Senator Lankford. Right.
    Mr. White. And I understand the importance of it.
    Senator Lankford. And I would hope you would lean in on 
that, because it is exceptionally important. It is a tremendous 
geopolitical leverage point for us. Where you get energy from 
is also a connection point in a relationship. You do not 
typically go to war with people that you are getting energy 
from. It is a long-term relationship that you form, actually, 
to be able to do this. So geopolitically, it is exceptionally 
important for us.
    One other question on this. I have talked to some 
manufacturers that are doing manufacturing in China rather than 
in Central America. And their comment is, the CAFTA agreements 
and other things, with the environment and the labor 
restrictions that are there, they do not have to deal with that 
in China. So some of these relationships actually push 
manufacturing to China based on the labor and environmental 
regulations.
    What would you recommend as a way to be able to encourage 
businesses to be able to do business in areas where we have 
trade agreements and not, because of our trade agreements, run 
to countries that do not have them?
    Mr. White. I would just point out that CAFTA, for example, 
or countries with whom we have free trade agreements, there are 
benefits derived from those trade agreements. They have duty-
free access into the United States. That is not the case with 
China.
    And so I think the incentive for doing business in CAFTA, 
in FTA countries, is the fact that they have duty-free, more or 
less, access into the U.S. market.
    Senator Lankford. Correct. But it is not being effective 
for all manufacturing. Some of those agreements are actually 
pushing in that direction. We can follow up on that.
    Mr. White. Yes. The problem with China is a very 
confounding one, and it is going to take a lot of work.
    Senator Lankford. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
    Senator Cortez Masto [presiding]. Thank you.
    Next, we have Senator Cantwell.
    Senator Cantwell. Thank you, Madam Chair, and thank you so 
much for this important hearing. Mr. White, it is great to see 
you on the other side of the dais this time, and I am very 
proud of you and the work that you have done on many fronts.
    I wanted to ask you about the recent USTR agreement between 
the EU and UK in addressing government support for large civil 
aircraft programs. How will the USTR monitor compliance on this 
issue? What do you think should be our priorities?
    Mr. White. Thank you for the question. This is a long-
running dispute that I am very familiar with, and it hits home 
to me.
    If confirmed, I want to get to the granular details of the 
conversations that were had between USTR and the EU, but I 
fundamentally agree that there needs to be robust monitoring of 
the EU's compliance with the deal. And also to make it clear 
that the U.S., and I think this is clear, that the U.S. is not 
a shrinking violet in terms of taking countervailing measures 
against the EU if they are not complying with the deal.
    Senator Cantwell. So a lot damage went into, I think, 
support for launch aid, and clearly people are trying to move 
forward in a new day, but I think compliance and oversight will 
be incredibly important. So I agree with you.
    On the issue of digital trade, there are concerns about 
some European countries' push for digital sovereignty as Europe 
recovers from the pandemic. European countries like Austria, 
France, Italy, Spain, and the UK have implemented digital 
service taxes.
    So I am pleased that the President has taken part in the 
U.S. discussion on trade and technology; that should be 
helpful. So, beyond dealing with the foreign digital services 
tax, what is the USTR strategy on digital trade?
    Mr. White. Digital trade is something that has been very 
central to my work over the last 10 years. It is really 
important. There has been divergence in policies between where 
the Europeans come from and where the United States comes from.
    I am encouraged that there is a discussion. I do not know 
the details of the discussion. I am encouraged, but I will 
pledge to consult with you and update you as to how the 
progress in those talks is going.
    Senator Cantwell. Are you concerned about protectionism?
    Mr. White. Yes.
    Senator Cantwell. And so, what do you think we should be 
doing here that would help in that regard?
    Mr. White. I think that this discussion with the Europeans 
is a good one. But I also think that we have allies around the 
world that agree with our approach on digital trade. We have 
seen that in USMCA, for example. We have seen that in the U.S.-
Japan Digital Trade Agreement, and we have allies at the WTO, 
believe it or not, that are allied with us on digital trade 
concepts that appeared in the USMCA.
    Senator Cantwell. Well, I will tell you, I told the Trade 
Ambassador that I do think this is the United States' 
opportunity to lead. The more we unite the world community 
around what we think are the standards and practices that 
should be adhered to, the better off we are going to be on 
this. So I hope that you will be aggressive in supporting that 
as well.
    Thank you, Madam Chair.
    Senator Cortez Masto. Senator Thune?
    Senator Thune. Thank you, Madam Chair. Good morning, and 
congratulations on your nominations.
    I am concerned that there is still not a nominee for Chief 
Ag Negotiator at USTR, and that is deeply concerning to farmers 
and ranchers across the country. And it is critical that the 
administration addresses this role as soon as possible to best 
serve our Ag Committee. And that is not to in any way minimize 
the important positions that you all are nominated for.
    Ms. Bianchi, what are your views on whether the United 
States should consider joining the updated Trans-Pacific 
Partnership or some version of that agreement? And how would 
you work to advance such a process?
    Ms. Bianchi. Well, thanks for the question, Senator. I 
think this administration has made it very, very clear that we 
have to be working with our allies. And I think the President 
had a successful trip last week in Europe, and I look forward 
to other efforts in that regard.
    But I think we have to start to engage with our allies and 
to see where we are in the Asia region. And, as we have been 
discussing this morning, there is also a top-to-bottom review 
going on about the work on China, and where the Phase One deal 
is, and where that leads us, and how we can make our trade more 
effective with China. And certainly, working with our allies is 
a big piece of that.
    Senator Thune. Specifically, do you think it makes sense to 
join the TPP? China, I am told, is now talking about trying to 
get into the Trans-Pacific Partnership.
    Ms. Bianchi. Yes. I think the TPP is a bit outdated. The 
challenges we face today are different than the ones we faced 
in 2014-2015. But I think the sentiment of working with our 
allies to try to counter the rise of China is incredibly 
important.
    Senator Thune. What other trade initiatives should the 
United States take to strengthen our economic relations in the 
Asia-
Pacific? And I am thinking of--an example might be a digital 
trade agreement with countries like Japan or South Korea, 
possibly a new FTA with Taiwan, or any other Asia-Pacific 
countries.
    Ms. Bianchi. Well, I do think it is important that we have 
started to take steps with Taiwan, and that there is a new TIFA 
process going on--and Secretary Blinken talked about that--and 
I know Ambassador Tai has met with her counterpart in Taiwan as 
well.
    I think we need to look at other places. I think digital 
trade is a really important place where we could look to work 
together and counter some of the pressures from China, as well 
as a lot of different countries.
    Senator Thune. Well, I hope you will give a lot of intense 
effort to that. I think right now that area of the world, 
unfortunately--and I was somebody who supported the TPP and 
thought that it made a lot of sense for us. And I think we have 
lost ground there, which we need to recover. And so I hope that 
you, in this position, will aggressively work to develop more 
robust relationships with some of the countries in that region 
of the world. And Taiwan would be a good example.
    Mr. White, part of your portfolio at USTR would include the 
trading relationship between the United States and the EU. I am 
concerned about the European Commission's inflexibility on new 
export certificate requirements on meat and dairy products. The 
Commission's decision to implement new certification 
requirements is set to take effect on August 21st and would 
block many American exports, including dairy products from 
South Dakota.
    This would be devastating to American farmers, processors, 
and exporters, and would certainly not help improve the EU-U.S. 
trade relations. So would you commit to prioritizing this 
matter? And if so, how would you work to resolve it?
    Mr. White. The answer is ``yes.'' We have had lots of 
challenges with ag exports to Europe for a very long time. And 
this is an important issue to you, and to other Senators on 
this committee. And so I would prioritize it. But once 
confirmed, I would consult with USDA, consult with my USTR 
colleagues, and consult with our mission in Brussels, to see 
what the state of play is.
    Senator Thune. Do you think it is--would you agree that 
having a Chief Ag Negotiator at USTR would help resolve such 
issues? The correct answer is ``yes.'' [Laughter.]
    Mr. White. If confirmed, we will have our discussion with 
Ambassador Tai about what the state of play is on the Chief Ag 
Negotiator.
    Senator Thune. I think it is critical that we get that 
position filled as soon as possible.
    My time has expired. Am I the last person, Madam Chair? 
Then let me, if I might, just ask a quick question of our HHS 
nom. And that is, as you know, Indian Health Service facilities 
in my State have had issues with abusive providers and poor 
quality of care for years. Communication is not always strong 
or timely when we are seeking information. So, if confirmed, 
will you commit to ensuring that HHS and IHS improve lines of 
communication with our office?
    Dr. Egorin. Senator, if confirmed, I commit to work with 
the Indian Health Service and CMS to make sure that we are 
responsive to your office with any questions.
    Senator Thune. Thank you.
    Madam Chair, thank you.
    Senator Cortez Masto. Thank you, Senator Thune. And I want 
to thank all the members for their participation. I would 
especially like to thank each of the nominees for being here, 
and for your responses today. And again, congratulations on the 
nominations.
    Regarding questions for the record, the deadline for 
members to submit QFRs will be Thursday, July 1st, at 5 p.m. 
That deadline is firm.
    Other than that, this hearing is adjourned.
    [Whereupon, at 12:20 p.m., the hearing was concluded.]

                            A P P E N D I X

              Additional Material Submitted for the Record

                              ----------                              


  Prepared Statement of Sarah Bianchi, Nominated to be Deputy United 
   States Trade Representative (Asia, Africa, Investment, Services, 
Textiles, and Industrial Competitiveness), With the Rank of Ambassador, 
                   Executive Office of the President
    Chair Wyden, Ranking Member Crapo, and members of the committee, 
good morning. My name is Sarah Bianchi. I live in Virginia with my 
husband and two children ages 12 and 10.

    I am honored to be with you today as you consider my nomination to 
be Deputy United States Trade Representative with a portfolio including 
Africa, Asia, and areas of services and investment. If confirmed, I 
will proudly serve with the strong team Ambassador Tai has put together 
to help our country emerge stronger from the pandemic and--as President 
Biden says--to build back better.

    Throughout my career, I have focused on increasing American 
competitiveness through a wide range of economic and domestic policy 
issues. I co-led the policy process for President Obama's 2012 State of 
the Union address, which included global tax policies and manufacturing 
initiatives to boost wages and improve career opportunities for 
American workers.

    From 2011-2014 I served as Director of Economic and Domestic Policy 
for then-Vice President Biden. Our work focused on the contributing 
factors and potential solutions to stop the loss of manufacturing jobs 
in the United States. I helped lead the extensive research and policy 
work that informed the 2014 report from the Vice President's office 
entitled ``Ready to Work: Job-Driven Training and American 
Opportunity,'' which identified several ways to help workers compete in 
today's global economy.

    As a senior advisor at the Biden Institute, I worked on issues to 
make America more competitive in the global economy, including on 
trade. And as a member of the Biden-Harris transition team, I led the 
domestic policy response to COVID-19. At the time, the pandemic was 
exposing the supply chain vulnerabilities in the American economy. I 
was pleased to see the administration launch a trade strike force, 
chaired by Ambassador Tai, to combat unfair trade practices and 
increase the resiliency of our supply chains. I look forward to 
supporting Ambassador Tai's work on this critical issue.

    The administration has been clear about its commitment to making 
the necessary investments at home and working with allies to address 
the challenges posed by China. We must have a coordinated and coherent 
approach that restores the necessary balance to our trade and economic 
relationship.

    Far too often, the review and development of trade policy is 
separated from the work of creating a competitive economy and a strong 
middle class. I believe trade must be intricately linked to this 
effort. I share President Biden's and Ambassador Tai's commitment to 
developing a worker-centered trade policy that encourages a race to the 
top so we can build back better.

    Giving workers a seat at the table will be essential as we develop 
policy. Ambassador Tai said earlier this month in a speech at the AFL-
CIO that ``by bringing workers from all backgrounds and experiences to 
the table, we will create inclusive trade policy that advances economic 
security and racial and gender equity.''

    Hearing workers' stories, their experiences, and perspectives will 
give us a better understanding of how trade has impacted their lives 
and how we can lift up communities and individuals that have long been 
overlooked. This approach will also guide our review of negotiations 
initiated by the previous administration.

    Ambassador Tai has also been clear that any path forward will be 
done in consultation with Congress. That is exactly what members of 
Congress, including those on this committee, saw first-hand with the 
United States-Mexico-Canada Agreement. USMCA is one of the most pro-
worker trade agreements ever implemented because workers had a seat at 
the negotiating table. It is the new template we must use for all 
future trade agreements and negotiations.

    This approach is essential to America's competitiveness in the 21st 
century, and it must be part of a comprehensive vision for the United 
States in the global economy.

    I have been fortunate to work with leaders who care deeply about 
America's workers. If confirmed, I will work with Ambassador Tai and 
the dedicated public servants at USTR to create inclusive trade policy 
that brings everyone along.

    Thank you again for considering my nomination, and I look forward 
to answering your questions.

                                 ______
                                 

                        SENATE FINANCE COMMITTEE

                  STATEMENT OF INFORMATION REQUESTED 
                               OF NOMINEE

                      A. BIOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION

 1.  Name (include any former names used): Sarah Abigail Bianchi.

 2.  Position to which nominated: Deputy United States Trade 
Representative.

 3.  Date of nomination: May 27, 2021.

 4.  Address (list current residence, office, and mailing addresses):

 5.  Date and place of birth: February 16, 1973; Atlanta, Georgia.

 6.  Marital status (include maiden name of wife or husband's name):

 7.  Names and ages of children:

 8.  Education (list all secondary and higher education institutions, 
dates attended, degree received, and date degree granted):

        Paideia High School.
        Atlanta, Georgia.
        Dates attended: August 1987 to June 1991.
        Diploma granted: June 1991.

        Harvard University.
        Cambridge, Massachusetts.
        Dates attended: September 1991 to June 1995.
        Diploma granted: June 1995, Bachelor of Arts magna cum laude.

 9.  Employment record (list all jobs held since college, including the 
title or description of job, name of employer, location of work, and 
dates of employment for each job):

        Intern, Domestic Policy Council.
        The White House.
        Washington, DC.
        September 1995 to May 1996.

        Confidential Assistant.
        Office of Management and Budget.
        Washington, DC.
        June 1996 to January 1997. \1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    \1\ Exact months are estimated throughout.

        Assistant Director for Health Policy.
        Domestic Policy Council.
        The White House.
        January 1997 to August 1998.

        Senior Policy Advisor to Vice President Gore.
        The White House.
        Washington, DC.
        August 1998 to March 2020.

        Deputy Policy Director.
        Gore for President.
        Nashville, TN.
        March 2000 to November 2000.

        Deputy Staff Director for Public Health.
        HELP Committee.
        U.S. Senate.
        February 2001 to June 2002.

        Consultant: Democratic Senate Campaign Committee, Democratic 
        Leadership Council, Freedom Health Care, John Kerry for 
        President.
        June 2002 to September 2003.

        National Policy Director.
        John Kerry for President.
        Washington, DC.
        September 2003 to November 2004.

        Investment Analyst.
        Eton Park Capital Management.
        Washington, DC/New York, New York.
        March 2005 to June 2011.

        Director of Domestic and Economic Policy for Vice President 
        Biden and
        Deputy Assistant to the President for Economic Policy.
        The White House.
        Washington, DC.
        June 2011 to June 2014.

        Managing Director.
        BlackRock.
        June 2014 to January 2015.

        Global Head of Policy Development and Senior Advisor.
        Airbnb.
        Washington, DC/San Francisco, CA.
        January 2016 to March 2018.

        Consultant.
        Washington, DC.
        March 2018 to June 2019.

        Senior Managing Director.
        Evercore ISI.
        Washington, DC.
        June 2019-present.

10.  Government experience (list any current and former advisory, 
consultative, honorary, or other part-time service or positions with 
Federal, State, or local governments held since college, including 
dates, other than those listed above):

        N/A.

11.  Business relationships (list all current and former positions held 
as an officer, director, trustee, partner (e.g., limited partner, non-
voting, etc.), proprietor, agent, representative, or consultant of any 
corporation, company, firm, partnership, other business enterprise, or 
educational or other institution):

          Evercore ISI, employee.
          Lyft, consultant.
          Consensys, consultant.
          The Biden Institute (Senior Advisor and Chair of the Policy 
        Advisory Board).
          The Governance Project, consultant.
          Emerson Collective, consultant.
          City of Birmingham, Alabama, consultant.
          Civic LLC, consultant.
          Academy of Achievement, consultant.
          Airbnb, employee.
          Blackrock, employee.
          Eton Park, employee.
          Harvard University, Institute of Politics Senior Advisory 
        Committee.

12.  Memberships (list all current and former memberships, as well as 
any current and former offices held in professional, fraternal, 
scholarly, civic, business, charitable, and other organizations dating 
back to college, including dates for these memberships and offices):

        Coach, Arlington Soccer Association, 2016-2019.

13.  Political affiliations and activities:

        a.  List all public offices for which you have been a candidate 
        dating back to the age of 18.

       None.

        b.  List all memberships and offices held in and services 
        rendered to all political parties or election committees, 
        currently and during the last 10 years prior to the date of 
        your nomination.

       None.

        c.  Itemize all political contributions to any individual, 
        campaign organization, political party, political action 
        committee, or similar entity of $50 or more for the past 10 
        years prior to the date of your nomination.

       Biden for President (via Act Blue), 02/11/20, $20.

       Biden for President, 11/06/19, $1,000.

       Biden for President (via Act Blue), 10/17/2019, $14.

       Biden for President (via Act Blue), 10/01/2019, $100.

       Biden for President (via Act Blue), 09/28/19, $100.

14.  Honors and awards (list all scholarships, fellowships, honorary 
degrees, honorary society memberships, military medals, and any other 
special recognitions for outstanding service or achievement received 
since the age of 18):

        None.

15.  Published writings (list the titles, publishers, dates, and 
hyperlinks (as applicable) of all books, articles, reports, blog posts, 
or other published materials you have written):

        Public Writings

        Keeping a Relentless Focus on the Middle Class and the Dignity 
        of Work, Biden Institute, September 19, 2017, https://
        www.bidenschool.udel.edu/biden
        institute/bloq/Paqes/Keepinq-a-Relentless-Focus-on-the-Middle-
        Class-and-the-Dignity-of-Work.aspx#.

        The Many Lessons of Senator John McCain, Medium, August 29, 
        2018, https://medium.com/@sarahbianchi/the-many-lessons-of-
        senator-john-mccain-93de850508d9.

        Life Lessons We Can All Learn from Joe Biden, Medium, June 7, 
        2015, https://medium.com/@sarahbianchi/life-lessons-we-can-all-
        learn-from-joe-biden-eee565ee3819.

        Go Harvard Cods?, The Harvard Crimson, February 5, 1994, 
        https://www.thecrimson.com/article/1994/2/5/go-harvard-cods-
        pthe-administration-has/.

        Club Boycott About Equal Access, Not Elitism (letter to the 
        editor), The Harvard Crimson, October 12, 1993, https://
        www.thecrimson.com/article/1993/10/12/club-boycott-about-equal-
        access-not/.

        Evercore Research Notes (for clients, copies provided to 
        committee)

        May 15, 2021: Republicans to send new counter offer next week 
        as optimism rises for a bipartisan infrastructure deal, but 
        challenges remain.

        May 12, 2021: Big week ahead for bipartisanship on 
        infrastructure even as Republicans and Democrats point fingers 
        on a weak jobs report.

        May 7, 2021: A busy week in Washington: Debt ceiling, gig 
        workers, vaccine diplomacy, and outlook for China bill.

        May 4, 2021: Roadmap for Biden's plan--starts with 
        bipartisanship through May.

        April 28, 2021: Biden to outline American Family Plan including 
        capital gains tax and increased top rate.

        April 27, 2021: New census data and reapportionment add 
        challenges for Democrats in the midterm elections.

        April 23, 2021: Week wrap in Washington: tax hikes and health 
        care make headlines as Biden readies for first address to 
        Congress.

        April 22, 2021: Flash Note: White House is not likely to 
        include health care and prescription drug pricing in American 
        Families Plan.

        April 22, 2021: House Democrats to introduce prescription drug 
        pricing reform legislation to put the issue in the spotlight 
        ahead of Biden's American Families Plan.

        April 20, 2021: Biden set to outline second package on human 
        infrastructure and individual taxes next week while an elusive 
        search for bipartisanship continues.

        April 13, 2021: Key developments are shaping the contours of 
        the infrastructure and tax legislation, including the corporate 
        tax rate and dividing up the legislation.

        April 6, 2021: As reactions come in on Biden infrastructure 
        plan, Manchin clear the corporate rate shouldn't go above 25 
        percent.

        March 31, 2021: Five takeaways from Biden's opening bid on 
        infrastructure and taxes.

        March 30, 2021: Biden's infrastructure spending plan looks to 
        be coming in at $2.25 trillion.

        March 30, 2021: Biden goes bigger and bolder as infrastructure 
        rollout nears.

        March 29, 2021: Biden coloring in the lines on legislative 
        strategy for the next package.

        March 26, 2021: Biden set to unveil more details of Build Back 
        Better next week--$3 trillion to kick start legislative 
        process.

        March 22, 2021: White House considering $3 trillion for next 
        round but many more decisions to go for infrastructure and 
        investment package.

        March 19, 2021: White House signals break up into multiple 
        bills is possible as early signs of challenges arise.

        March 18, 2021: Filibuster reform looks more likely as Biden 
        supports a ``talking filibuster'' but it won't change the 
        trajectory on taxes.

        March 16, 2021: Taxes, taxes, taxes--how Biden and then 
        Congress might pay for the next bill.

        March 11, 2021: Biden tax plan--plenty of headline risk even 
        though it won't all become law.

        March 11, 2021: The next bill: how will Democrats go about the 
        infrastructure and investment package?

        March 8, 2021: Three issues that may shape the fiscal spending 
        debate this summer: Medicare Trust Fund, debt ceiling, and 
        August recess.

        March 4, 2021: Messy procedural processes and new fiscal 
        questions won't stop the Senate from passing COVID relief on 
        time.

        February 25, 2021: Flash Note--Senate Parliamentarian rules 
        against minimum wage hike.

        February 23, 2021: One of the early tests for minimum wage 
        could come this week.

        February 22, 2021: Yellen signals higher taxes in the next 
        package but Congress won't go as far as administration.

        February 15, 2021: Democrats take charge in Washington: early 
        takeaways and signposts for the road ahead.

        October 13, 2020: U.S. Q4 stimulus chances waning; eyes turn to 
        Q1 but it likely won't fully make up for Q4.

        October 12, 2020: Ten trends Trump needs to turn in twenty-two 
        days.

        October 12, 2020: A compendium: the election and impact of a 
        democratic sweep.

        October 9, 2020: On again-off again-on again: fiscal stimulus 
        negotiations resumed with Pelosi and Mnuchin speaking again.

        October 8, 2020: As the chances of a larger Democratic sweep 
        increase, Democrats could pass more of their agenda--but they 
        still cannot legislate too far left.

        October 6, 2020: Yet another October surprise: Trump tweet 
        storm puts stimulus negotiations off for now but we'll see if 
        it sticks.

        October 5, 2020: Fiscal negotiations continue and Trump tweets 
        support--chances of a deal are inching upward but timing is 
        slowed due to Senate illnesses.

        October 2, 2020: Trump diagnosis ups odds of a stimulus deal 
        and a blue sweep.

        October 1, 2020: Pelosi and Mnuchin both have new plans--today 
        will be critical to determine if they can bridge the gap and 
        bring others along.

        September 29, 2020: Fiscal stimulus--renewed talks and a new 
        House bill don't change the odds that much for a pre-election 
        deal.

        September 28, 2020: A comprehensive overview of what Democrats 
        might do if they sweep the elections and implications for key 
        sectors.

        September 24, 2020: Speaker Pelosi and Secretary Mnuchin talks 
        don't improve that much the outlook for a stimulus deal before 
        the election.

        September 21, 2020: A September surprise: how the death of 
        Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg changes the landscape for 2020.

        September 16, 2020: Fiscal stimulus--some political posturing, 
        no progress, and grim prognosis.

        September 9, 2020: Fiscal stimulus harder to pass without a 
        clear action forcing mechanism--it's in Trump's court to change 
        the dynamics.

        September 3, 2020: What is on tap for the election homestretch? 
        And will there be an ``October Surprise''?

        August 24, 2020: What would a Democratic sweep mean for health 
        care?

        August 21, 2020: What to expect at the Republican National 
        Convention: China, the economy, and more.

        August 19, 2020: Flurry of activity around USPS funding and 
        renewed legislative fiscal efforts, but no serious 
        conversations yet.

        August 13, 2020: See you in September--fiscal four negotiations 
        break down leaving legislative action till September as 
        Washington focuses on political conventions.

        August 10, 2020: Senate Election Guide: While a Democratic 
        sweep is an increasingly likely outcome, control of the Senate 
        likely to move with the Presidency.

        August 7, 2020: Fiscal Four negotiations stalling with some 
        risk, but a deal is still likely and the number is moving up.

        August 4, 2020: These talks are going awfully slow--we still 
        think ultimately they will get there on legislation--and not 
        much from Trump unilaterally.

        July 30, 2020: Trump can't postpone the election--but he is 
        setting up a narrative to call into question the results, which 
        has the potential to cause quite a mess.

        July 28, 2020: Flash Note: Republicans unveil $1 trillion 
        stimulus package--at least allowing negotiations to begin in 
        earnest.

        July 22, 2020: Congress is off to a slow start despite a quick 
        time crunch to resolve Fiscal Four--a package is not likely 
        until the first week in August.

        July 7, 2020: Congress has a very tight deadline to negotiate 
        Fiscal Package Four--that leaves economic risks.

        July 1, 2020: What happens to taxes in a Democratic sweep? It 
        depends on the economy and the Senate.

        June 16, 2020: Flash Note: How does a White House 
        Infrastructure Plan fit into our outlook for Fiscal Four and 
        the rest of the congressional agenda? Not very well.

        June 9, 2020: 2020 election series: a deep dive on the key 
        factors that will determine the presidency.

        June 7, 2020: Week in Washington wrap--large protests, good 
        economic news, and more U.S./China tensions.

        June 5, 2020: Surprisingly good jobs report makes another 
        fiscal stimulus more challenging to pass Congress but we still 
        expect one more this summer.

        May 29, 2020: Twitter vs. Trump: The President's Executive 
        Order on section 230 is more bark than bite--but it underscores 
        why section 230 reform is the biggest risk facing the tech 
        industry.

        May 28, 2020: New poll shows selecting Elizabeth Warren for VP 
        would do the most to help Biden win, but many considerations at 
        play.

        May 21, 2020: Why U.S.-China policy is critical to President 
        Trump's reelection strategy--and what it means for investors.

        May 20, 2020: Powell's comments are helping move Congress 
        closer towards next stimulus deal.

        May 14, 2020: Pelosi's ambitious $3 trillion fiscal package 
        unlikely to go anywhere as Republicans wait to see how existing 
        relief works.

        May 7, 2020: Battle lines are hardening making it unlikely next 
        stimulus passes in May.

        May 6, 2020: Replay and Note on Webinar: Understanding the 
        Growing U.S.-China Tensions with Sarah Bianchi and Guest 
        Michael Allen.

        May 5, 2020: Tough China rhetoric likely to last through the 
        election--but Trump administration won't implement the harshest 
        policy options under discussion.

        April 28, 2020: Congress is coming back to DC but given the 
        divisions how will they move forward on the next stimulus.

        April 26, 2020: Week in Washington wrap--more stimulus but what 
        about oil, small business, housing, voting and State and local 
        fiscal relief and the price tag!

        April 21, 2020: Senate passes next fiscal package focused on 
        small businesses--even as PPP comes under criticism.

        April 21, 2020: A growing macro issue: U.S. state and local 
        budget holes.

        April 20, 2020: A really big election is coming--and how voting 
        takes place could impact the outcome.

        April 15, 2020: Flash Note: Real progress now underway on 
        Fiscal Package #4.

        April 13, 2020: Partisanship making the roadmap to stimulus #4 
        harder as Democrats advocate for more than just small business 
        expansions.

        April 7, 2020: Oh Right It's an Election Year--Senator Sanders 
        to Exit Shortly and New Questions about How to Vote Amid 
        Coronavirus Emerge.

        April 3, 2020: Pelosi walks back idea of adding infrastructure 
        to next relief package--but still pushing for it as part of 
        recovery.

        March 31, 2020: Starting on the fourth stimulus--a few places 
        of common ground emerge--including infrastructure--but many 
        different priorities.

        March 26, 2020: The final bill! Senate passes fiscal stimulus 
        bill--House scheduled vote tomorrow.

        March 25, 2020: Half yard line--update on the (very almost 
        final) $2 trillion fiscal package.

        March 24, 2020: At the one yard line--what is in the (almost 
        final) $2 trillion fiscal package.

        March 23, 2020: Flash Note--No Senate votes tonight but. . . .

        March 23, 2020: Ready for a rocky morning as the next Senate 
        vote not till noon.

        March 22, 2020: As cloture vote fails in the Senate--
        negotiations continue through the night.

        March 22, 2020: Delaying Senate cloture vote till 6 p.m.--a 
        good sign that negotiations are continuing around differences 
        in the $500B in corporate relief.

        March 22, 2020: Congress speeding to a $1.6 trillion + package; 
        leaders meeting this morning to hash out agreement; first vote 
        scheduled for 3 p.m.

        March 21, 2020: Evaluating the next phase of fiscal relief from 
        Congress: what will work, what won't, and what could.

        March 21, 2020: Negotiating a $1 trillion plus stimulus staying 
        largely on track--because there is no other choice.

        March 19, 2020: Flash Note--Enter McConnell's plan, bigger on 
        business aid but smaller household checks.

        March 19, 2020: Some parts of the White House $1 trillion plan 
        for fiscal package #3 will sail smoothly other ideas will hit 
        bumps as policymakers tee up the next package.

        March 17, 2020: Update on fiscal package #3--currently at $1 
        trillion, will only get bigger, and will get done--but doesn't 
        mean it will be easy.

        March 17, 2020: Congress moving towards massive stimulus 
        package--Congress likely passes next week and could exceed $1 
        trillion.

        March 16, 2020: Flash Note--Romney proposes $1,000 checks; 
        fiscal politics remain fluid.

        March 16, 2020: Fiscal policy response is moving but DC still 
        lagging on what is needed.

        March 13, 2020: Flash Note--Trump declares national emergency.

        March 12, 2020: Flash Note--Pelosi and Mnuchin agree on deal; 
        House likely to vote tonight or tomorrow; Senate likely to 
        follow Monday; no large stimulus in this bill.

        March 12, 2020: Despite partisan back and forth we think 
        Congress likely to pass some version of Pelosi bill this week.

        March 11, 2020: Flash Note--Trump comes up short on stimulus, 
        overshadowed by European restrictions.

        March 11, 2020: Flash Note--Pelosi to pass her first phase 
        legislative package this week--Senate may well follow--won't be 
        enough to calm markets.

        March 10, 2020: Flash Note--Political tensions and calendar 
        will make fiscal package this week hard and will be limited.

        March 10, 2020: Flash Note--Moving quickly we will likely see 
        some action this week--but not enough to impress markets.

        March 9, 2020: Flash Note--Washington waking up to need for 
        stimulus--some actions like sick leave could pass quickly.

        March 3, 2020: The key question for the reshaped Democratic 
        primary: how delegates divide after Super Tuesday.

        February 29, 2020: Biden's South Carolina win provides momentum 
        and raises odds that Bloomberg gets out of the race BEFORE 
        Super Tuesday.

        February 28, 2020: Coronavirus enters center stage and could 
        remake the 2020 political and economic environment.

        February 28, 2020: It's all about the delegates--Can Bernie 
        Sanders rack up enough delegates on Super Tuesday to make him 
        too hard to catch?

        February 25, 2020: Is Sanders stoppable starting in South 
        Carolina? What to watch in tonight's debate.

        February 21, 2020: The blasting of Bloomberg was brutal, but 
        the bigger issue is whether anyone can keep Bernie from running 
        so far ahead no one can catch him.

        February 19, 2020: Enter Bloomberg Stage Right--And Can Anyone 
        Stop `the Bern'? What to Watch in Tonight's Debate.

        February 14, 2020: Can anyone get 1,991 delegates? The 
        increasingly likely path to a contested Democratic convention.

        February 11, 2020: Five Takeaways from Coronavirus Webinar with 
        White House Ebola Czar Ron Klain.

        February 7, 2020: What to watch in tonight's debate that wraps 
        up the Democrats terrible, horrible, no good very bad week.

        February 6, 2020: What's Next for the Democratic Primary Post 
        the Iowa Debacle and Heading to New Hampshire.

        February 4, 2020: The loser tonight--the Iowa caucus.

        February 3, 2020: Flash Note: Quick guide to watching Iowa 
        reporting.

        February 3, 2020: The impact of the Iowa caucus--will Sanders 
        keep surging? If so, is it a two person race or a muddled mess 
        In the middle?

        January 31, 2020: Political Reset: A New Political Landscape in 
        Washington is Coming Next Week--And It's Going to Make Some 
        Democrats VERY Nervous.

        January 27, 2020: Flash Note: Infrastructure and prescription 
        drugs will top the likely-to-stall legislative agenda--starting 
        with Pelosi's 2020 infrastructure plan this week.

        January 24, 2020: Is Bernie Sanders surging just at the right 
        time? Could he win the Democratic primary?

        January 22, 2020: The implications of the Senate impeachment 
        trial--for 2020 and beyond.

        January 13, 2020: A comprehensive guide to the 2020 Democratic 
        presidential primary--the path to the nomination and the policy 
        implications.

        December 12, 2019: Pelosi's busy week--Part 3: Congress reaches 
        agreement to fund government through end of FY 2020.

        December 10, 2019: Pelosi's busy week--Day 2: USMCA deal, 
        articles of impeachment, passing prescription drugs and moving 
        on the budget.

        December 9, 2019: Outlook for health care provisions in any 
        budget deal--Congress wants to fix the health tax issues and 
        might kick the can on real surprise billing.

        December 9, 2019: Pelosi's busy holiday season--impeachment, 
        drug pricing, USMCA, and budget all on tap for remaining days.

        December 4, 2020: It's always darkest before dawn--even if 
        `phase one' deal timing slows, contours remain intact and the 
        President is highly unlikely to pull the trigger on December 
        15th tariffs; Speaker Pelosi still likely to pass USMCA.

        November 26, 2019: Flash Note--It is hard for Mayor Bloomberg 
        turn unlimited funds into votes--and not totally clear who 
        he'll take them from.

        November 20, 2019: Flash Note--What to watch in tonight's 
        Democratic debate: the first four all have flaws. Whoever can 
        best address their weakness wins the night and maybe the 
        nomination.

        November 8, 2019: Enter Bloomberg stage right? Many unknowns 
        but the short-term winner is clear: Elizabeth Warren who 
        welcomes a change of conversation from her Medicare for all 
        plan.

        November 1, 2019: Warren back on offense on health care--
        fiscally she now has an answer, but did she create more 
        problems than she solved?

        October 20, 2019: Evaluating a potential Warren presidency--
        starting with what Warren can do without Congress.

        October 17, 2019: Flash Note--be ready for a Buttigieg boomlet.

        October 16, 2019: Senator Warren feels the fire fit for a 
        frontrunner--debate kicks off a new phase for the Democratic 
        primary.

        October 15, 2019: Warring with Warren, questioning Trump's 
        China deal, furious with Facebook, and beyond--a guide to the 
        Democratic debate.

        October 11, 2019: Phew! They crossed the tightrope--assessing 
        Part I of the China trade ``deal.''

        October 9, 2019: Wait, what's the strategy again? Making sense 
        of U.S./China talks.

        October 1, 2019: U.S. politics--impeachment tsunami has reset 
        the Washington climate, but policy landscape largely intact.

        September 26, 2019: Speeding towards impeachment: a brief road 
        map.

        September 24, 2019: We're barreling towards impeachment.

        September 20, 2019: Flash Note--House kicks can on budget fight 
        until mid-November.

        September 19, 2019: President Trump's response to the Pelosi 
        bill is not enough to overcome Senator McConnell's resistance.

        September 19, 2019: Mark Zuckerberg's ``good will'' tour in 
        Washington is a good, but small, step given the serious risks 
        facing big tech.

        September 19, 2019: Flash Note--Pelosi's prescription drug plan 
        is as expected; the key is still how President Trump responds.

        September 17, 2019: Flash Note--Response to Saudi oil attack, 
        good trade news, risks for big tech and more on deck in DC this 
        week.

        September 13, 2019: Flash Note--Debate takeaway on China: while 
        Trump tries to settle down uncertainty around China, 2020 
        Democrats rev it up.

        September 11, 2019: Flash Note--Trump's ``gesture of good 
        will'' to delay tariffs is a sign of an effort to settle the 
        uncertainty with China.

        September 10, 2019: Flash Note--Pelosi prescription drug bill: 
        four quick points.

        September 9, 2019: U.S. policy and markets: the top dozen 
        issues + election.

16.  Speeches (list all formal speeches and presentations (e.g., 
PowerPoint) you have delivered during the past 5 years which are on 
topics relevant to the position for which you have been nominated, 
including dates. Provide the committee with one digital copy of each 
formal speech and presentation):

        N/A.

17.  Qualifications (state what, in your opinion, qualifies you to 
serve in the position to which you have been nominated):

        For years, I have worked on a wide range of economic and 
        domestic policy issues around American competitiveness. I co-
        led the policy development process for President Obama's 2012 
        State of the Union address which included developing a number 
        of global tax policies and manufacturing initiatives designed 
        to enhance America's competitiveness and improve job 
        opportunities for American workers, particularly those whose 
        jobs were at risk or lost due to trade policies.

        In addition, for the 3 years I served as Director of Economic 
        and Domestic Policy for then-Vice President Biden much of our 
        work focused on the loss of manufacturing jobs in the United 
        States--both the contributing factors as well as the best path 
        forward. I also was involved in extensive research and policy 
        work that led to the report by Vice President Joe Biden in 2014 
        entitled ``Ready to Work: Job-Driven Training and American 
        Opportunity'' that outlined many of the issues of how to 
        compete in the global economy.

        As a senior advisor at the Biden Institute, we worked on a 
        range of issues around making America more competitive in the 
        global economy, including trade. As a member of the Biden-
        Harris transition, I led the domestic response to COVID-19 
        where it quickly became clear that the supply chain 
        vulnerabilities in the American economy were laid bare by the 
        COVID pandemic.

        Too often trade policy is considered separately from the work 
        of creating a country with a competitive economy and a strong 
        middle class. Trade must be intricately linked to this effort. 
        I share President Biden's and Ambassador Tai's commitment to 
        developing a trade agenda infused and informed by the overall 
        goal of building back better. It is essential to America's 
        competitiveness and a strong future for our workers that trade 
        policy works for America's workers and is part of a 
        comprehensive vision for the United States in the global 
        economy.

                   B. FUTURE EMPLOYMENT RELATIONSHIPS

 1.  Will you sever all connections (including participation in future 
benefit arrangements) with your present employers, business firms, 
associations, or organizations if you are confirmed by the Senate? If 
not, provide details.

        Yes.

 2.  Do you have any plans, commitments, or agreements to pursue 
outside employment, with or without compensation, during your service 
with the government? If so, provide details.

        No.

 3.  Has any person or entity made a commitment or agreement to employ 
your services in any capacity after you leave government service? If 
so, provide details.

        No.

 4.  If you are confirmed by the Senate, do you expect to serve out 
your full term or until the next presidential election, whichever is 
applicable? If not, explain.

        Yes.

                   C. POTENTIAL CONFLICTS OF INTEREST

 1.  Indicate any current and former investments, obligations, 
liabilities, or other personal relationships, including spousal or 
family employment, which could involve potential conflicts of interest 
in the position to which you have been nominated.

        In connection with the nomination process, I have consulted 
        with the Office of Government Ethics and the Office of the 
        Designated Ethics Official of the Office of the U.S. Trade 
        Representative to identify any potential conflicts of interest. 
        Any conflict of interest will be resolved according to the 
        terms of an ethics agreement I am entering into with the Office 
        of the U.S. Trade Representative and that will be provided to 
        this committee.

 2.  Describe any business relationship, dealing, or financial 
transaction which you have had during the last 10 years (prior to the 
date of your nomination), whether for yourself, on behalf of a client, 
or acting as an agent, that could in any way constitute or result in a 
possible conflict of interest in the position to which you have been 
nominated.

        N/A.

 3.  Describe any activity during the past 10 years (prior to the date 
of your nomination) in which you have engaged for the purpose of 
directly or indirectly influencing the passage, defeat, or modification 
of any legislation or affecting the administration and execution of law 
or public policy. Activities performed as an employee of the Federal 
Government need not be listed.

        N/A.

 4.  Explain how you will resolve any potential conflict of interest, 
including any that are disclosed by your responses to the above items. 
(Provide the committee with two copies of any trust or other 
agreements.)

        In connection with the nomination process, I have consulted 
        with the Office of Government Ethics and the Office of the 
        Designated Ethics Official of the Office of the U.S. Trade 
        Representative to identify any potential conflicts of interest. 
        Any conflict of interest will be resolved according to the 
        terms of an ethics agreement I am entering into with the Office 
        of the U.S. Trade Representative and that will be provided to 
        this committee.

 5.  Two copies of written opinions should be provided directly to the 
committee by the designated agency ethics officer of the agency to 
which you have been nominated and by the Office of Government Ethics 
concerning potential conflicts of interest or any legal impediments to 
your serving in this position.

 6.  The following information is to be provided only by nominees to 
the positions of United States Trade Representative and Deputy United 
States Trade Representative:

        Have you ever represented, advised, or otherwise aided a 
        foreign government or a foreign political organization with 
        respect to any international trade matter at any time in any 
        capacity? If so, provide the name of the foreign entity, a 
        description of the work performed (including any work you 
        supervised), the time frame of the work (e.g., March to 
        December 1995), and the number of hours spent on the 
        representation.

        No.

                       D. LEGAL AND OTHER MATTERS

 1.  Have you ever been the subject of a complaint or been 
investigated, disciplined, or otherwise cited for a breach of ethics 
for unprofessional conduct before any court, administrative agency 
(e.g., an Inspector General's office), professional association, 
disciplinary committee, or other ethics enforcement entity at any time? 
Have you ever been interviewed regarding your own conduct as part of 
any such inquiry or investigation? If so, provide details, regardless 
of the outcome.

        No.

 2.  Have you ever been investigated, arrested, charged, or held by any 
Federal, State, or other law enforcement authority for a violation of 
any Federal, State, county, or municipal law, regulation, or ordinance, 
other than a minor traffic offense? Have you ever been interviewed 
regarding your own conduct as part of any such inquiry or 
investigation? If so, provide details.

        No.

 3.  Have you ever been involved as a party in interest in any 
administrative agency proceeding or civil litigation? If so, provide 
details.

        No.

 4.  Have you ever been convicted (including pleas of guilty or nolo 
contendere) of any criminal violation other than a minor traffic 
offense? If so, provide details.

        No.

 5.  Please advise the committee of any additional information, 
favorable or unfavorable, which you feel should be considered in 
connection with your nomination.

        N/A.

                     E. TESTIFYING BEFORE CONGRESS

 1.  If you are confirmed by the Senate, are you willing to appear and 
testify before any duly constituted committee of the Congress on such 
occasions as you may be reasonably requested to do so?

        Yes.

 2.  If you are confirmed by the Senate, are you willing to provide 
such information as is requested by such committees?

        Yes.

                                 ______
                                 
          Questions Submitted for the Record to Sarah Bianchi
                 Questions Submitted by Hon. Ron Wyden
    Question. Your portfolio includes Africa, and to the extent the 
administration chooses to continue the negotiations with Kenya, you may 
be charged with leading those negotiations. This is the first bilateral 
trade deal being negotiated with a sub-Saharan African country, so it 
is important that any agreement we reach be ambitious and enforceable, 
with high standards on issues like the environment, labor, the rule of 
law and digital trade.

    Kenya has a unique labor environment, including a sizable informal 
labor market. How would you ensure that we could achieve high-standard 
and enforceable labor obligations with Kenya?

    How do you view an agreement with Kenya fitting into the United 
States' overall engagement with African nations, including through 
AGOA?

    Answer. I understand that the Biden-Harris administration is 
currently reviewing the proposed U.S.-Kenya agreement that the previous 
administration initiated. If confirmed, I would review the model of 
USMCA in order to understand how labor, environment, and human rights 
would be core elements of our trading relationship with Kenya and how 
the United States could support the newly formed African Continental 
Free Trade Area (AfCFTA), which began in January 2021.

    --Question. If you are confirmed, your portfolio will include 
competition policy. That could cover a broad variety of issues, many of 
them directly connected to China. In our recent bipartisan competition 
and innovation bill, Ranking Member Crapo and I approached this issue 
from two sides--both addressing ways to support U.S. innovators, 
workers, and businesses, and taking action to level the playing field 
with China and other countries that engage in unfair trade practices.

    When you think about competition policy, what does that encompass, 
and what could USTR be doing--or doing better--to ensure American 
workers can compete fairly with their counterparts abroad?

    Answer. I agree with the approach taken in the bipartisan 
competition and innovation bill, of thinking about both the actions we 
can take domestically to enhance the competitiveness of key sectors 
important to U.S. jobs and economic growth as well as taking strong 
action to ensure those sectors can compete fairly with China and other 
practices. USTR can and does work to ensure that trade policies support 
and reinforce those domestic actions. If confirmed, I will work to 
further those efforts.

                 Questions Submitted by Hon. Mike Crapo
                     engagement with tpp countries
    Question. The administration has said that the Trans-Pacific 
Partnership (TPP) agreement needs to be reevaluated ``since much has 
changed in the world since TPP was originally signed in 2016.'' 
Meanwhile, China stands poised to have better market access than the 
United States in the region because its Regional Comprehensive Economic 
Partnership agreement--or RCEP--is advancing toward entry into force.

    What, if any, are the specific developments since 2016 that you 
think have made TPP outdated--and what could be done to update TPP 
disciplines in response to those developments?

    Answer. The Biden-Harris administration has taken critical steps to 
improve U.S. supply chain resiliency after COVID-19 revealed 
significant gaps in our supply chains that make us more vulnerable to 
crises. We realize that we cannot make or mine everything. Trade must 
be a component of strengthening our supply chains--and our economy. If 
confirmed as Deputy USTR, I will work to advance a high-standard, 
worker-centered trade policy that represents a viable alternative to 
China, reflects American values, supports U.S. manufacturing, and 
reduces vulnerabilities in our supply chains.
                      china market and censorship
    Question. China's market access restrictions and its censorship 
policies often run in parallel. For example, China imposes a quota of 
34 foreign films a year, and often places pressure on our creative 
industries to censor the content of their works in order to secure a 
seat at this limited table. This hurts American employment--and 
undermines our values.

    What measures do you believe the administration should consider 
deploying in response to this problem?

    Answer. The Chinese Government's censorship policies are an affront 
to democratic, open societies. They are deeply problematic for the 
Chinese people, and others around the world as the government extends 
its censorship extraterritorially. The denial of market access is an 
important commercial facet of this much larger concern. We have seen 
that, to date, China has a record of nominal compliance with many core 
trade obligations, and securing Chinese compliance with its trade 
commitments is an ongoing problem. President Biden has pledged to work 
with allies to address the adverse consequences of non-market 
authoritarian behavior.

                                 ______
                                 
               Questions Submitted by Hon. Maria Cantwell
                        trade with asia-pacific
    Question. What is your view on multilateral trade agreements in the 
Asia-Pacific region?

    How does USTR plan to utilize the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation 
forum (APEC) to make progress on the U.S. economic agenda and bolster 
the United States' position in the region?

    How does USTR now intend to approach Japan? Will USTR continue 
bilateral trade talks or will it take a multilateral approach on 
agriculture and other market access issues?

    How will USTR approach South Korea? How USTR help us work with 
allies like South Korea to ensure supply chain resiliency for critical 
industries?

    Answer. The Biden-Harris administration is committed to investing 
in our multilateral relationships. If confirmed, I will make it a 
priority to engage with our trading partners in APEC, ASEAN, and other 
multilateral settings. By collaborating with our allies in the Asia-
Pacific including Korea and Japan, we can advance a worker-centered 
trade policy and improve U.S. supply chain resiliency, while also 
addressing bilateral trade priorities.
                         301 exclusions process
    Question. Where does the review of the 301 tariff exclusion process 
stand? How long will U.S. companies have to wait for answers about 
whether and when the 301 tariff exclusion process might be re-instated?

    Answer. The administration is currently reviewing its strategy with 
respect to China, in light of its Build Back Better agenda to create 
good-paying jobs and support American families. Similarly, USTR is 
reviewing the China trade policy, including the section 301 tariffs and 
exclusions. If confirmed, I will ensure that the approach to an 
exclusion process and its reinstatement is consistent with the 
administration's goals and a worker-centered trade policy.

    Question. Will USTR consider reinstating 301 tariff exclusions as 
quickly as possible for companies that previously received them?

    Answer. If confirmed, I will consider the question of past tariff 
exclusions, and a future exclusion process in the context of the 
administration's goals and furthering a worker-centered trade policy.

                                 ______
                                 
              Questions Submitted by Hon. Robert Menendez
    Question. A number of my colleagues and I have been urging the 
administration to accelerate our trade talks with Taiwan toward the 
objective of negotiating a full trade agreement. Taiwan is a vibrant 
democracy and the right type of partner with whom the U.S. can develop 
the high-standard, progressive trade policy this administration is 
looking for. Any final agreement should also incorporate strong rules 
of origin and other safeguards to ensure that the PRC cannot use a 
U.S.-Taiwan trade agreement as a back door into the U.S. market.

    How do you think we can best strengthen our trade ties with Taiwan?

    Answer. Taiwan is an important economic and strategic partner for 
the United States. USTR recently concluded a round of TIFA negotiations 
with Taiwan, and, if confirmed as Deputy USTR, I look forward to 
building off of that progress to strengthen this critical relationship 
by collaborating on our shared interests, such as resilient supply 
chains.

    Question. Will you commit to consulting with my office on any trade 
negotiations with Taiwan, if confirmed?

    Answer. If confirmed, I commit to consulting closely with Congress 
on trade engagement with Taiwan.

    Question. Ambassador Tai said during her confirmation hearing that 
she would commit to ``close consultations with the Senate Finance 
Committee on trade negotiations'' and would work closely with the 
committee to identify ways to ``improve the flow of information in the 
development of trade policy.''

    Do you likewise make this commitment?

    Answer. Yes.

    Question. Since USTR has committed to follow the 2015 Guidelines 
for Consultation and Engagement, will you commit to seek input from the 
Committees on Finance and Ways and Means on U.S. text proposals before 
sharing them with other governments and commit to provide an oral 
update to this committee on the status of negotiations both before and 
after each negotiating session?

    Answer. If I am confirmed, I will follow the 2015 Guidelines for 
Consultation and Engagement.

                                 ______
                                 
              Questions Submitted by Hon. Thomas R. Carper
                     multilateral trade agreements
    Question. On June 22, 2021 the Finance Subcommittee on 
International Trade, Customs, and Global Competitiveness held a hearing 
to review the benefits of a multilateral approach to trade policy in 
the Asia-Pacific region. We heard from experts who advised us on how 
the United States can get its seat back at the table and actively work 
with our allies to form new agreements to boost jobs and economic 
growth in our country.

    Could you please share your perspective on the merits of a 
multilateral approach to trade policy in the Asia-Pacific region?

    Would you agree that the United States needs a strategy for 
reengaging our allies in the Asia-Pacific region on trade? If yes, what 
are the essential elements that must be addressed to ensure that the 
United States can successfully reengage in the region?

    Answer. If confirmed, I will work with Ambassador Tai to deepen 
trade engagement in the Asia-Pacific region. The Biden-Harris 
administration is committed to investing in our multilateral 
relationships. As Deputy USTR, I will make it a priority to engage with 
our trading partners in APEC, ASEAN, and other multilateral settings. 
By collaborating with our allies in the Asia-Pacific, we can advance a 
worker-centered trade policy and create a high-standard alternative to 
China's influence in the region.
                             digital trade
    Question. Today, Americans rely on the Internet for a variety of 
uses, including work, education, health care, commerce, and much, much 
more. The Internet has also inspired innovation and spurred economic 
development. Many of our trade agreements were written before the 
development and widespread use of the Internet or have not kept up with 
recent developments in the digital world.

    What can be done to position the United States to be a leader on 
digital trade matters?

    Answer. The responsible use of technology provides innumerable 
benefits to citizens all over the world. Digital trade policies can 
harness those benefits and, if crafted correctly, promote shared 
prosperity. I am also mindful, however, that irresponsible use of 
technology has destabilizing effects, including of democracy itself, 
and otherwise undermines trust in both the digital economy and in trade 
itself. Moreover, existing digital trade agreements fail to acknowledge 
the critical role of workers in the digital economy. If confirmed, I 
look forward to working with members of this committee to ensure the 
United States can become a leader on digital trade.

                                 ______
                                 
             Question Submitted by Hon. Sheldon Whitehouse
    Question. The U.S. textiles industry employs over half a million 
workers nationwide, including many in Rhode Island, and is the second 
largest exporter of textile products in the world. The industry has 
played a critical role in supplying personal protective equipment 
throughout the COVID-19 pandemic. China's Made in China 2025 initiative 
includes textiles among the advanced materials it hopes to target.

    What will you do to ensure our trade policies address unfair 
advantages enjoyed by foreign textiles manufacturers?

    Answer. The Biden-Harris administration is committed to taking on 
unfair Chinese trade policies in all sectors, including textiles. The 
COVID-19 pandemic has shown just how important a modern textiles 
industry can be, and, if confirmed, I look forward to working with you 
on this important issue.

                                 ______
                                 
              Question Submitted by Hon. Elizabeth Warren
    Question. I appreciate the commitment you expressed in the hearing 
to elevating labor and environmental issues across your portfolio at 
USTR, if confirmed. One key relevant issue is rules of origin (ROO) in 
trade agreements. ROO can ensure that preferential treatment is granted 
only to imports from countries subject to the trade agreement's rules, 
which should include strong, enforceable labor and environmental 
standards. Weak ROO, however, can force the U.S. to grant preferential 
treatment to products that are by value largely from countries outside 
of trade agreement and therefore subject to none of its commitments. 
The Trans-Pacific Partnership, for example, not only lacked adequate 
labor and environmental rules, its ROO would have applied preferential 
treatment to cars with components from non-TPP countries comprising 
more than half the vehicle's value.

    Do you agree that trade agreements must include strong, enforceable 
labor and environmental standards, as well as robust rules of origin, 
so that preferential treatment is not extended to countries with poor 
labor and environmental practices?

    Answer. Yes.

                                 ______
                                 
               Question Submitted by Hon. Chuck Grassley
    Question. Iowa is a leading hub for amino acid innovation and 
production for use in animal agriculture throughout the United States. 
I am concerned that unfair Chinese subsidies to its amino acid industry 
have resulted in unfair increases in imports of Chinese amino acids 
such as Lysine and Threonine. These unfair trade practices jeopardize 
the vitality of U.S. amino acid producers, the U.S. amino acid supply 
chain, and American corn growers.

    If confirmed, will you include the issue of potential Chinese 
unfair practices in the amino acid space as part of the Biden 
administration's international trade agenda with China? Will you also 
commit to briefing my office and the relevant Capitol Hill committees 
on this issue on a biannual basis?

    Answer. China's nonmarket economy and industrial policies 
disadvantage U.S. companies and workers in numerous sectors. If 
confirmed as Deputy USTR, I commit to making it a priority to combat 
China's unfair trade practices, including those that harm U.S. amino 
acid producers. I will consult closely with Congress on these efforts.

                                 ______
                                 
                Questions Submitted by Hon. John Cornyn
    Question. When nominee Tai appeared before us, now 3 months ago, 
many Senators raised questions about the 25-percent section 301 China 
tariffs the last administration had reimposed in January, and many of 
us expressed our hope that USTR would act quickly to retroactively 
extend the exclusions and set up a new round for applications for 
exclusions. In her answers, she said, ``If confirmed, I commit to 
assessing the section 301 tariffs and exclusion process as part of 
President Biden's comprehensive approach to confronting the China 
challenge.''

    She appeared again 5 weeks ago, and Senators pressed her on when we 
could expect USTR to act. She answered, ``As soon as we can, and ensure 
that what we are doing has been thought through and is strategic and 
has a clear objective.''

    Last week, the Senate expressed its growing frustration with USTR's 
inaction by adding provisions to the Innovation and Competition Act 
that would compel USTR to retroactively renew exclusions and establish 
a new process to apply for exclusions. This legislative action comes 
after impacted companies and consumers have payed billions of dollars 
in reimposed tariffs, a full five months since the President was 
inaugurated, and three months after Katherine Tai was confirmed.

    One specific area of complaint where an exclusion was previously 
granted and was raised by my constituents is the import of art to 
museums and exhibits here in the U.S.

    If confirmed, can you commit to making the reestablishment of an 
exclusion process for the section 301 tariffs an immediate priority?

    Answer. The administration is currently reviewing its strategy with 
respect to China, in light of its Build Back Better agenda to create 
good-paying jobs and support American families. Similarly, USTR is 
reviewing the China trade policy, including the section 301 tariffs and 
exclusions. If confirmed, I will ensure that the approach to an 
exclusion process and its reinstatement is consistent with the 
administration's goals and a worker-centered trade policy.

    Question. In May, USTR announced that it would support the waiving 
of intellectual property for COVID-19 vaccines and support text-based 
negotiations on a broader anti-innovation proposal from India and South 
Africa--longtime opponents of intellectual property protections. This 
was a dramatic shift from our historic and longstanding support for 
stronger IP protections and enforcement globally. In other words, we 
are usually in the business of supporting American innovation and 
creativity, not supporting giving it away to our competitors.

    Since such a waiver of WTO/TRIPS agreement is likely to undermine--
not expand--existing manufacturing capacity issues and will come months 
after the U.S. has already donated its excess supply for the rest of 
the world, as Deputy USTR will you recommit this administration to this 
country's longstanding and bipartisan support for American intellectual 
property?

    Answer. The Biden-Harris administration believes strongly in 
intellectual property protections. The COVID-19 pandemic presented an 
extraordinary circumstance that required extraordinary measures. The 
administration therefore supported a TRIPS waiver for COVID-19 vaccines 
in service of ending this terrible global pandemic. The 
administration's aim is to get as many safe and effective vaccines to 
as many people as fast as possible. As our vaccine supply for the 
American people is secured, the administration will continue to ramp up 
its efforts--working with the private sector and all possible 
partners--to expand vaccine manufacturing and distribution.

    Question. One week from today will mark the 1-year anniversary from 
entry into force of the USMCA. Over the last year, however, Mexico has 
moved backwards here--and is now either non-compliant or threatening to 
take action that would make them non-compliant with the agreement in a 
wide range of issues that includes preferential treatment for state-run 
energy companies, regulatory delays for U.S. ag biotech and 
biopharmaceutical products, and local content quotas for film and 
television programming, among other issues.

    If this kind of disregard for the USMCA persists, will you support 
USTR taking enforcement action to protect America's commercial 
interests in the agreement?

    Answer. If confirmed, I plan to use all of the tools available to 
fully implement and uphold the promises and aims of the USMCA agreement 
to protect U.S. commercial interests and U.S. workers.

    Question. Farmers across Texas depend on export markets to maintain 
farm income levels. The door has been cracked open in several emerging 
markets, such as Southeast Asia where U.S. nonfat dry milk/skim milk 
product exports have increased nearly 66 percent since 2018. With trade 
agreements in place with countries like Vietnam and Malaysia to reduce 
both tariff and nontariff barriers, there would likely be exponential 
growth in U.S. agricultural exports to these markets. Strong exports 
are of course great in terms of supporting the milk prices the dairymen 
and dairywomen in Texas receive.

    Could you please touch on the Biden administration's plans to 
engage Southeast Asian countries in future trade negotiations?

    Would you support some type of a multilateral, regional agreement 
that accomplishes this goal such as the CPTPP?

    Answer. The President is focused on making domestic investments 
that will boost American competitiveness. These investments will 
provide a solid foundation for ensuring that American goods, including 
dairy products as well as manufactured goods, are globally competitive. 
Inadequate infrastructure itself inhibits American competitiveness. The 
President has indicated that he will not enter into any new agreements 
until these investments have been made. However, it my expectation 
that, if confirmed, I will be in close contact with our allies in 
Southeast Asia to ensure that we are cooperating on a wide range of 
trade matters, and to ensure that we are maximizing market access 
opportunities already provided under the trade agreements we have in 
the region.

    Question. The Comprehensive and Progressive Agreement for Trans-
Pacific Partnership (CPTPP) has entered into force without the United 
States. The agreement represents approximately half a billion people 
and 14 percent of the global economy. American companies were 
negatively impacted when the U.S. withdrew from the TPP agreement in 
2017. Joining the CPTPP would be a good opportunity for the U.S. to 
reclaim global leadership and write the rules of the road regarding 
trade, intellectual property, environmental and labor standards. It 
would also serve as an important foothold into key markets and help the 
U.S. compete against China.

    Do you support the U.S. joining the CPTPP or an equivalent 
agreement in the Asia-Pacific region?

    If not, can you explain why and what alternative you propose to 
help the U.S. counter China's rising influence and ensure that American 
exporters do not continue losing market share to their competitors?

    Answer. Ambassador Tai noted in her confirmation hearing that the 
Trans-Pacific Partnership was a good idea in concept. I agree with that 
view, and I agree that it is important for the United States to engage 
in the region. However, Ambassador Tai also noted that we have learned 
many important lessons over the past decade, including during the 
pandemic. The pandemic in particular highlighted the problems with 
concentrated supply chains in China. Any U.S. engagement in the region 
must ensure that we do not adopt policies that unintentionally 
exacerbate those supply chain concerns, or otherwise do not reflect a 
contemporary understanding of the challenges in the region.

    Question. This month I, along with Senators Coons and Young, 
introduced the Stopping and Excluding Chinese Ripoffs and Exports with 
U.S. Trade Secrets or SECRETS act. This bill creates an Interagency 
Committee on Trade Secrets to recommend the U.S. International Trade 
Commission (ITC) institute a National Security Exclusion Order (NSEO) 
to block those products containing or produced by those stolen trade 
secrets. It only applies in the case of trade secrets stolen by a 
foreign agent or instrumentality as defined in the Economic Espionage 
Act. The ITC can issue the NSEO within 30 days if it is more likely 
that not that the imports meet the criteria. This provides the U.S. 
government a rapid response, deterrent mechanism for IP theft by a 
foreign, sovereign power while providing due process through the ITC.

    Can you tell me your thoughts on this bill (S. 2067)?

    If confirmed, can you commit to working with me and my staff to 
provide technical assistance and feedback as it moves through the 
legislative process?

    Answer. I support strong enforcement with respect to trade secret 
theft that disadvantages U.S. innovators and workers. Such theft is 
particularly concerning when sponsored or conducted by a state actor. I 
support the goal of this bill of deterring and countering the impact of 
such theft.

    If confirmed, I will work with you to provide technical assistance 
on aspects of the bill relevant to the equities and responsibilities of 
USTR.

                                 ______
                                 
                 Questions Submitted by Hon. John Thune
    Question. What trade initiatives, or potential trade agreements, 
should the U.S. take to strengthen our economic relations in the Asia-
Pacific? Please provide at least three examples.

    Answer. If confirmed, I will work with Ambassador Tai to deepen 
trade engagement in the Asia-Pacific region. Specifically, I will work 
with our trading partners in multilateral settings, such as APEC, as 
well as in bilateral settings, to advance a worker-centered trade 
policy that represents a high-standard alternative to China. If 
confirmed, I will work with Ambassador Tai to craft a trade policy in 
partnership with our allies that protects workers' rights and human 
rights.

    Question. What are your views on the U.S. leading a digital trade 
agreement with countries in the Asia-Pacific? If confirmed, which 
countries would you prioritize for such an agreement and how would you 
work to advance those initiatives?

    Answer. If confirmed, I am committed to working with the Biden-
Harris administration to craft a trade policy that strengthens our 
economic relationships in the Asia-Pacific region.

    Question. If the administration does not actively lead in trade in 
the Asia-Pacific, what type of message will it send in terms of 
American interest--and willpower--to remain a leader in the global 
economy?

    Answer. The Biden-Harris administration is already demonstrating 
that the United States is back on the global stage. If confirmed, I am 
committed to working with the Biden-Harris administration to craft a 
trade policy that strengthens our economic relationships in the Asia-
Pacific region and benefits American workers, farmers and ranchers, and 
businesses.

    Question. At the hearing you suggested that the Comprehensive and 
Progressive Agreement for Trans-Pacific Partnership (CPTPP) was 
outdated.

    What specific areas of the CPTPP are outdated? Do you believe the 
U.S. should enter the CPTPP or some version of the agreement? What are 
your thoughts on China's interest in joining the CPTPP?

    Answer. If confirmed as Deputy USTR, I will work to advance a high-
standard, worker-centered trade policy that reflects American values, 
supports U.S. manufacturing, and reduces vulnerabilities in our supply 
chains. Any trade agreement must be good for U.S. workers. It must have 
strong labor standards and effective labor enforcement mechanisms.

    China's commitment to its nonmarket economic model and 
unwillingness to change its industrial policies are well known. I will 
work to ensure U.S. trade policy represents a viable, effective 
alternative to China's industrial policies.

    Question. I recently introduced a bipartisan resolution to call on 
the WTO to reform its special and differential treatment rules so that 
globally competitive countries such as China, with the world's second 
largest economy, can no longer self-designate as a developing country 
to gain unfair trade advantages. China declaring as a developing 
country at the WTO misidentifies its economic standing, undermines 
countries that are truly developing, and corrodes trust in the WTO 
itself.

    Do you agree that the WTO should reform its special and 
differential treatment rules so that major economies can no longer 
self-designate as a developing country? Would you expand on your 
thoughts on this issue?

    Answer. I agree that claiming special and differential treatment 
allows major global economies to exempt themselves from WTO rules, 
which weakens the organization's standards and effectiveness. If 
confirmed as Deputy USTR, I will work with Ambassador Tai and the USTR 
team in Geneva to reform the WTO in this and other areas.

                                 ______
                                 
                Questions Submitted by Hon. Richard Burr
    Question. China's violations of trade laws have disadvantaged many 
U.S. businesses and workers. As you know, however, North Carolina's 
agricultural exports have been affected by China's retaliatory tariffs, 
and because of this China's ag purchase commitments in Phase One of the 
China deal are incredibly significant for farmers in my State.

    If confirmed, what steps will you take to ensure these commitments 
are fulfilled?

    Answer. If confirmed, I will work with Ambassador Tai to ensure 
China lives up to its commitments under the Phase One Agreement, and I 
will work with the entire USTR team to maximize market opportunities 
for U.S. agricultural producers, including in China.

    Question. Last month the Senate passed the Trade Act of 2021 as an 
amendment to the China bill by a vote of 91-4. This amendment includes 
a process for companies to request exclusions from the section 301 
tariffs, a process that is necessary to ensure companies are not 
unfairly penalized while we continue to pursue strong trade actions 
against China.

    If confirmed, will you reinstitute the exclusion process, and if 
so, how soon? What actions will you take regarding previously granted 
exclusions which have expired?

    Answer. The administration is currently reviewing its strategy with 
respect to China, in light of its Build Back Better agenda to create 
good-paying jobs and support American families. Similarly, USTR is 
reviewing the China trade policy, including the section 301 tariffs and 
exclusions. If confirmed, I will participate in this review and in 
crafting an approach in line with a worker-centered trade policy.

    Question. A cornerstone of U.S. free trade agreements such as USMCA 
and CAFTA-DR is the yarn-forward rule of origin for textile and apparel 
products. This is critically important to the U.S. cotton, yarn 
spinning and textile industries, as well as to the entire North 
American supply chain. This production-based rule ensures that the 
benefits of the agreements go to manufacturing industries and workers 
in participatory countries--and not third country parties like China 
who don't play by the rules.

    With this in mind, will you support a strong yarn-forward rule of 
origin for all future free trade agreements?

    Answer. I expect future agreements to build on the yarn-forward 
rule found in the USMCA.

                                 ______
                                 
                Questions Submitted by Hon. Bill Cassidy
                                 shrimp
    Question. Recently, Congress took action to ensure seafood imports 
harvested or produced using forced labor do not enter the United 
States. In doing so, Congress directed USTR to engage with 
``interested'' countries identify best practices, coordinate on data 
sharing, reduce barriers to trade in fairly grown or harvested fish and 
end the trade of products that either pose a risk of fraud or that have 
been harvested or produced using illegal, unregulated or unreported 
fishing, human trafficking or forced labor.

    What countries do you believe would be interested in partnering 
with the United States to address these issues?

    Answer. I believe there will be many allied countries who will want 
to actively engage with the U.S. on all facets of halting forced labor 
including fishing. I hope that all nations will join in supporting a 
meaningful outcome that will halt these abhorrent practices.

    Question. What mechanisms can USTR utilize to bring countries to 
the table who maybe reluctant to engage on these issues?

    Answer. The Biden administration firmly believes that there is no 
place for human trafficking and forced labor in any part of 
international trade and will do everything in its power to eliminate 
these elements from being exported to the United States. The 
administration will not hesitate to coordinate interagency efforts to 
block imports and launch multilateral disputes to ensure these 
practices are stopped. If confirmed, I look forward to supporting those 
efforts.

    Question. Earlier this month, USTR announced a decision to impose 
an additional 25-percent tariff on imports from India valued at roughly 
$119 million, effective November 29, 2021 under its section 301 
authority of the Trade Act of 1974. These are retaliatory tariffs 
against Indian imports as a result of the digital services tax (DST). I 
was pleased to see certain shrimp products imported from India were 
included in the USTR's announcement. However, USTR's announcement 
refers to cold water shrimp. Cold water shrimp are not harvested in 
India because of its geographical location. Cold water shrimp--as the 
name suggests--are cultured and harvested from the ocean floors of the 
North Atlantic and Arctic Oceans. I raised this issue in May with Ms. 
Tai: applying duties to the cold water shrimp imports would likely be 
ineffective, because importers would simply switch back to warm water 
categories to avoid the 25-percent tariff.

    Stakeholders tell me they believe that the cold water shrimp 
entering the U.S. from India is actually warm water shrimp that is 
being mislabeled in order to avoid our anti-dumping tariffs. It would 
be considerably more practicable and effective to instead apply 
additional duties to warm water shrimp from India. Warm water farmed 
shrimp is India's most important agricultural export, and the United 
States is India's most important market for warm water shrimp. 
Therefore, imposing duties on warm water shrimp will be a more direct 
and vigorous means of incentivizing the Indian Government to reform the 
application of its DST to U.S. digital services providers.

    First, how can we fix this issue so that we are imposing tariffs on 
shrimp actually raised or harvested from India?

    Answer. In crafting a potential action under section 301 of the 
Trade Act of 1974, the U.S. Trade Representative must determine what is 
appropriate in light of the findings that, in this case, India's 
Digital Services Tax is unreasonable and discriminatory and burdens or 
restricts U.S. commerce. USTR adopted an action with respect to 26 
tariff subheadings, with an estimated trade value for calendar year 
2019 of approximately $119 million. If, in fact, these tariffs cover a 
product that is mislabeled, originating from a country other than 
India, USTR should work with Customs and Border Protection to ensure 
that the products covered by the 301 action enter under the correct 
country of origin, and if appropriate, modify the action to ensure it 
continues to apply to the identified level of trade.

    Question. What are your thoughts on how we ensure the U.S. takes 
appropriate action to protect Americans from consuming shrimp farmed by 
an industry that has faced disease outbreaks, chemical overuse, and 
illegal, unreported, and unregulated (``IUU'') practices?

    Answer. In March, the U.S. International Trade Commission published 
a report about the challenge of illegal, unreported, and unregulated 
fishing in U.S. seafood imports and the impact on the U.S. fisheries 
industry. For 20 years, the members of the World Trade Organization 
(WTO) have long sought to negotiate an agreement to combat harmful 
fisheries subsidies. The United States has been a consistent leader in 
this process and recently submitted a thoughtful proposal to address 
the connection between forced labor and subsidies in the fishing 
industry and the necessity of supply chain transparency and 
responsibility. The WTO trade ministers are meeting this month to 
discuss progress on this important matter. If confirmed, I will support 
progress towards a meaningful agreement.
                              trips waiver
    Question. In May, USTR announced that it would support the waiving 
of intellectual property for COVID-19 vaccines and support text-based 
negotiations on a broader anti-innovation proposal from India and South 
Africa--longtime opponents of intellectual property protections. This 
was a dramatic shift from our historic and longstanding support for 
stronger IP protections and enforcement globally. In other words, we 
are usually in the business of supporting American innovation and 
creativity, not supporting giving it away to our competitors. Since 
such a waiver of WTO/TRIPS agreement is likely to undermine--not 
expand--existing manufacturing capacity issues and will come months 
after the U.S. has already donated its excess supply for the rest of 
the world.

    As Deputy USTR can you please share your position on this issue, 
and please explain your thoughts on how you will protect property 
rights going forward.

    Answer. The Biden-Harris administration believes strongly in 
intellectual property protections. The COVID-19 pandemic presented an 
extraordinary circumstance that required extraordinary measures. The 
administration therefore supported a TRIPS waiver for COVID-19 vaccines 
in service of ending this terrible global pandemic. The 
administration's aim is to get as many safe and effective vaccines to 
as many people as fast as possible. As our vaccine supply for the 
American people is secured, the administration will continue to ramp up 
its efforts--working with the private sector and all possible 
partners--to expand vaccine manufacturing and distribution.

                                 ______
                                 
                 Questions Submitted by Hon. Todd Young
    Question. I know the administration is focused on assessing and 
mitigating issues with our supply chain, evident by the recent report 
on supply chain resiliency. The report included a specific section on 
biopharmaceuticals and called out innovation as a key component in 
spurring the research and development that was needed for the COVID-19 
response. Innovators must have strong intellectual property protections 
to increase efficiency, maintain quality, and most importantly, save 
lives. Without these safeguards, research and development will no doubt 
plummet and hinder advancements needed to reach those in need.

    Do you believe that IP protections are a critical part of creating 
an environment conducive to innovation?

    If confirmed, how will you ensure that innovators can boost their 
supply chain resiliency and meet the recommendations set forth in the 
administration's supply chain report?

    Answer. As part of the 100-day review of critical supply chains 
conducted in response to President Biden's Executive Order 14017, USTR 
will lead a Trade Strike Force that will propose unilateral and 
multilateral enforcement actions against unfair foreign trade practices 
that have eroded critical supply chains. The trade strike force will 
also identify opportunities to use trade agreements to strengthen 
collective approaches to supply chain resilience with U.S. partners and 
allies.

    Question. Recently, the White House announced a new joint 
initiative with the EU, the Trade and Technology Council (TTC). Among 
its various goals, ensuring fair competition and establishing global 
trade standards for emerging technologies are among the issues the TTC 
will focus on. Yet, the EU has taken several unilateral actions that 
would significantly impact American companies' ability to compete in 
Europe; one example is the proposed Digital Markets Act, which would 
prevent market dominance by forbidding ``gatekeeper'' companies from 
undertaking certain actions. If this proposal were to become law in 
Europe, it is highly anticipated that this would subject major U.S. 
digital companies to various restrictions.

    How do you propose the U.S. should use the new TTC partnership as a 
strategic transatlantic response toward China's efforts to gain supply 
chain and technology dominance?

    Answer. President Biden has often emphasized that market 
democracies, not China, should write global rules governing trade and 
technology. Transatlantic cooperation on trade in emerging technology 
products through the Trade and Technology Council is of particular 
importance for sectors that both the U.S. and the EU have identified as 
critical for our respective efforts to strengthen our supply chain 
resilience in the face of Chinese industrial policies, such as clean 
energy and semiconductors. If confirmed, I would work to make sure 
these efforts are effective.

    Question. In late May, the Senate voted to include the Trade Act of 
2021 to the United States Innovation and Competition Act, which would 
allow importers to obtain relief from section 301 tariffs imposed on 
certain products from China, including renewing and extending expired 
section 301 exclusions through December 31, 2022.

    If confirmed, will you commit to working with U.S. stakeholders, in 
coordination with Ambassador Tai, to reform the exclusion process and 
renew expired section 301 tariff exclusions with retroactive extension 
and/or another opportunity for applications?

    Answer. The administration is currently reviewing its strategy with 
respect to China, in light of its Build Back Better agenda to create 
good-paying jobs and support American families. Similarly, USTR is 
reviewing the China trade policy, including the section 301 tariffs and 
exclusions. If confirmed, I will ensure that the approach to an 
exclusion process and its reinstatement is consistent with the 
administration's goals and a worker-centered trade policy.

                                 ______
                                 
                 Questions Submitted by Hon. Ben Sasse
    Question. If confirmed, Asia will be a part of your portfolio as 
Deputy United States Trade Representative (DUSTR). Given the CCP's 
growing influence in the region, we must continue to pursue creative 
economic solutions in order address this challenge. I have previously 
discussed with Ambassador Tai the possibility of creating a tech 
alliance among democracies with shared values.

    Can you describe the strategic challenges for the United States 
posed by continued economic and technological independence with the 
CCP?

    How do you plan to think creatively about crafting trade agreements 
in the tech and digital spaces with countries that share our values to 
jointly push back on China's techno-authoritarianism?

    Will you commit to presenting this committee with a strategy for 
establishing critical technology and digital trade agreements with our 
like minded allies and partners?

    Answer. I believe digital trade provides the United States with an 
opportunity to advance shared goals among the United States and other 
democracies with shared values, particular to fight techno-
authoritarianism. Digital trade policies that reflect the entire 
digital ecosystem, from infrastructure, to workers, to market access, 
to consumers, will allow the United States to address the threat of 
digital authoritarianism more holistically. If confirmed, I would 
welcome the opportunity to present the committee with a strategy to 
achieve these goals.

    Question. The ratification process for Regional Comprehensive 
Economic Partnership (RCEP) is steadily advancing and includes several 
large economies such as China, Australia and South Korea.

    Is RCEP a threat to U.S. economic and security interest? Why or why 
not?

    Answer. RCEP is an agreement that may prove to be more symbolic 
than substantive. While it does not include labor and environmental 
standards, it does not prohibit the parties from committing to those 
standards elsewhere and thus does not undermine broader U.S. goals of 
ensuring that trade agreements facilitate shared prosperity. As the 
experience of the United States and others at the World Trade 
Organization indicates, while China is often willing to make 
commitments in trade agreements, its adherence to those commitments 
falls well short. Notably, India chose not to sign RCEP, even after 
having participated in the negotiation.

    Question. Following U.S. withdrawal from the Trans-Pacific 
Partnership (TPP), the remaining member countries moved on to form the 
Comprehensive and Progressive Agreement for Trans-Pacific Partnership 
(CPTPP) in 2018. The current configuration of CPTPP, as well as RCEP, 
will likely stimulate intra-East Asian integration.

    Should the U.S. consider joining the CPTPP or another TPP-like 
multilateral agreement? Please explain why or why not.

    Answer. The promise of CPTPP is that it will stimulate intra-East 
Asian integration. However, the rules of CPTPP itself do not 
necessarily align with the premise. The industrial supply chain rules, 
for example, permit significant content to come from non-parties. 
Ambassador Tai indicated during her confirmation hearing that TPP was a 
good idea in concept. However, she also noted that we have learned many 
important lessons over the past decade, including during the pandemic. 
The pandemic in particular highlighted the problems with concentrated 
supply chains in China. Any U.S. engagement in the region must ensure 
that we do not adopt policies that unintentionally exacerbate those 
supply chain concerns, or otherwise do not reflect a contemporary 
understanding of the challenges in the region.

    Question. I was pleased to hear Ambassador Tai and Taiwan Minister-
Without-Portfolio John Deng's joint commitment to reconvene the Trade 
and Investment Framework (TIFA) talks. Taiwan has proven to be a strong 
U.S. economic and strategic partner.

    Do you view a trade agreement with Taiwan to be an important 
national security approach in counteracting China?

    How will you approach an FTA with Taiwan now that Taiwan has 
granted greater access for U.S. pork and beef?

    Where does an FTA with Taiwan fall on your priority list and where 
do you see hurdles to an agreement?

    Answer. I believe the United States and Taiwan have significant 
opportunities to cooperate on trade, including with respect to supply 
chain security and resilience. In addition to supply chains, Taiwan and 
the United States have agreed to cooperate on ensuring that trade 
promote shared prosperity, setting up a Labor Working Group, and will 
also cooperate on environmental issues, including climate change.

                                 ______
                                 
               Questions Submitted by Hon. John Barrasso
    Question. In Wyoming, we have a lot to offer the Asian-Pacific 
region. We produce some of the highest quality beef in the world. 
Wyoming wants to export our beef, our soda ash, our coal/oil/natural 
gas to this critical region.

    Japan and Taiwan, among others continue to be major growth markets 
for Wyoming exports. In fact, Wyoming opened its only international 
trade office in Taipei, Taiwan in September 2018.

    How does a multilateral approach versus a bilateral approach help 
Wyoming access these export opportunities in the region?

    Answer. If confirmed, I will work with Ambassador Tai to deepen 
trade engagement in the Asia-Pacific region, which is critical to 
countering China's influence in the region. I understand how important 
market access opportunities are for U.S. producers, and I am committed 
to working with the Biden-Harris administration to craft a trade policy 
that benefits American workers, farmers and ranchers, and businesses.

    Question. We are in a critical moment in the U.S.-China relations. 
Given China's rapid rise as an economic powerhouse and their aggressive 
behavior in the region and across the globe, can you discuss the 
importance of the strengthening U.S. trade relations with Taiwan?

    If the U.S. re-engages on the Comprehensive Progressive Agreement 
for Trans-Pacific Partnership (CPTPP), which I believe is in our best 
interest, how likely is it that we can integrate Taiwan into this 
multilateral framework?

    If we can't integrate Taiwan into a larger multilateral deal, 
should the U.S. pursue a bilateral deal instead?

    Answer. Taiwan is an important economic and strategic partner for 
the United States. USTR recently concluded a round of TIFA negotiations 
with Taiwan that covered a variety of issues, and, if confirmed as 
Deputy USTR, I look forward to building off of that progress to 
strengthen this critical relationship by collaborating on our shared 
interests, such as resilient supply chains.

    Question. The Trump administration used tariffs to bring China to 
the negotiating table.

    I believe they were effective in that regard. However, I also 
believe tariffs have a shelf-life and there comes a point when they do 
more harm than good.

    Can you share your thoughts about how the section 301 tariffs have 
impacted American companies, workers and consumers?

    Answer. In some circumstances, the tariffs imposed on imports from 
China under section 301 have likely impacted U.S. companies, workers 
and consumers. However, analysis varies of the extent and duration of 
that impact. In addition, we must counterbalance other objectives, 
including discouraging the theft of China's predatory actions to 
transfer technology from U.S. companies, which has led to shutting the 
United States from certain supply chains. When we think of tariffs 
overall, we should also consider how shifting and diversifying supply 
chains may ultimately be a positive externality for the security and 
economic well-being of the United States.

    Question. As the global economy begins to recover from the damage 
inflicted over the past year, many of our competitors are actively 
pursuing trade agreements to improve market access and secure a 
competitive advantage in key markets, especially in Asia.

    The United States, however, is taking a very conservative approach 
to trade negotiations. I believe this is a mistake and one we should 
correct quickly.

    Is it possible for the U.S. government to successfully negotiate 
free trade agreements without Trade Promotion Authority?

    Answer. If an agreement has a sufficient base of support, then it 
may be possible for the agreement to pass both chambers without the 
procedural safeguards of Trade Promotion Authority. The recent passage 
of USMCA suggests that such an outcome is possible.

    Question. Is there any good reason why the Senate Finance Committee 
should not prioritize reauthorization of TPA?

    Answer. I defer to the committee on whether it should prioritize 
reauthorization of Trade Promotion Authority.

    Question. Can the United States afford to fall behind our 
competitors by not securing free trade agreements?

    Answer. U.S. competitiveness is a priority for the administration. 
Competitiveness encompasses a number of factors, including whether our 
domestic policies do enough to support American workers. Market access 
under free trade agreements is reciprocal. If we do not support 
American competitiveness, through infrastructure and critical 
investments in our people, then we will not be in a position to take 
advantage of any market access provisions we might negotiate through 
trade agreements.

    Question. I believe we need to move quickly to reassert American 
influence in Asia and strengthen our economic and national security 
ties with our allies. While the administration continues to reassess 
the way we make trade deals, China running circles around us. They are 
signing trade deals as quickly as they can. They are expanding their 
influence and trying to assert economic influence in all corners of the 
globe.

    When can we expect the administration to push for new trade deals?

    And should we seek to strengthen bilateral relations while pursuing 
a multilateral agreement in the region?

    Answer. President Biden has made it clear that he is committed to 
pursuing investments here at home before signing new trade agreements. 
Investing in our infrastructure, communities, and workers will help to 
make the United States more competitive. If confirmed as Deputy USTR, I 
look forward to supporting the Biden-Harris administration's efforts to 
make critical domestic investments and working with Ambassador Tai to 
craft the trade policies to support them.

    Question. Strong intellectual property (IP) protections in the 
United States are critical for the invention and manufacturing of 
innovative medicines and medical technologies. It is not a coincidence, 
therefore, that the United States leads the world both in terms of 
inventing and manufacturing these products and providing intellectual 
property protections that incentivize innovation.

    The President has called for waiving intellectual property rights 
(IPRs) for vaccines because of the global health crisis. I strongly 
disagree.

    At the same time, he has made it very clear that this 
administration believes the world is facing a ``climate crisis.'' On 
April 22nd, the President called on countries to ``step up'' and take 
further action on climate change in order to ``overcome the existential 
crisis of our time.''

    Do you think the COVID-19 pandemic is a crisis?

    Do you agree with the President that because of this crisis vaccine 
IPRs should be waived?

    Do you agree with the President that there is a climate crisis?

    Do you think we should waive American intellectual property rights 
on green technology to combat the climate crisis?

    What's the difference?

    Answer. Within the first full week of taking office, President 
Biden issued executive orders on both the COVID-19 pandemic and the 
climate crisis. I agree with the President on the critical nature of 
both issues and was glad, in particular, that Ambassador Tai joined the 
President's Leaders Summit on April 22nd to discuss the potential 
benefits of green jobs and technology to workers and the jobs of a 
sustainable, more equitable, and prosperous future.

    Question. U.S. businesses are often at a disadvantage vis-a-vis 
state-owned enterprises (SOEs) that are not guided by market 
principles. Such SOEs benefit from environmental, health, and labor 
standards below that of publicly traded companies. The uranium miners 
in Wyoming know this only too well, as U.S. mining has come to a 
standstill at the hands of increased imports from places like Russia, 
Uzbekistan and other countries where the Chinese have significant 
mining investments. U.S. trade policy needs a clear strategy for 
addressing the SOE imbalance.

    Can you describe in detail how you would approach the challenges 
facing U.S. companies with respect to SOEs?

    Is USTR adequately equipped to address the SOE issue to ensure 
American workers and businesses have level playing field in the 
international marketplace? If not, can you explain where you think 
existing USTR authority falls short in this area?

    Answer. State-owned enterprises and other industrial policies of 
nonmarket economies undermine U.S. companies and their workers. The 
President's Trade Agenda makes clear that combating unfair trade 
practices is a top priority of the administration. If confirmed as 
Deputy USTR, I will work with Ambassador Tai to fully enforce existing 
trade agreements and negotiate new trade rules to better combat global 
market distortions caused by nonmarket economies. In addition, I will 
seek to build support for these initiatives with like-minded U.S. 
trading partners. I look forward to working with Congress on these 
efforts.

                                 ______
                                 
                Prepared Statement of Hon. Mike Crapo, 
                       a U.S. Senator From Idaho
    Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Ms. Bianchi, Mr. White, and Dr. Egorin, 
welcome, and congratulations to all of you on your respective 
nominations to very important positions.

    While I appreciate we have two Deputy USTR nominees before us, I am 
disappointed the administration has yet to nominate anyone to serve as 
USTR Chief Innovation and Intellectual Property Negotiator (Chief IP 
Negotiator), U.S. Ambassador to the World Trade Organization (WTO), or 
Chief Agricultural Negotiator.

    The administration's failure to nominate a Chief IP Negotiator and 
a U.S. Ambassador to the WTO is particularly striking because the WTO 
is starting weekly meetings today to discuss a potential waiver to the 
WTO TRIPS Agreement. Not only is the decision to seek a waiver 
misguided, but it is also unwise to negotiate such a waiver without 
having the appropriate negotiators in place. The administration should 
promptly name qualified individuals to these roles.

    Likewise, the United States needs a qualified Chief Agricultural 
Negotiator as soon as possible. This is particularly important for 
agricultural areas like Idaho, where 31 percent of gross farm income 
comes from exports. USDA estimates the United States will export $164 
billion in farm goods this year.

    That impressive number could be much higher if we could open more 
markets to our world-class agricultural sector. Accordingly, the United 
States needs effective Deputy USTRs to tear down trade barriers and 
confront abusive trade practices, and today's nominees are well-
qualified for their positions.

    I urge each of them to remember that any strong trade policy 
requires a close partnership between USTR and Congress. Ms. Bianchi and 
Mr. White are no strangers to government service, having each served 
for more than a decade in various capacities. I look forward to hearing 
more from both of you, Ms. Bianchi and Mr. White, regarding how you 
would use your experience to engage the numerous challenges facing the 
United States, particularly those involving China's intellectual 
property theft, discriminatory digital services taxes, and the 
proliferation of trade barriers in Mexico.

    Turning to Dr. Egorin's nomination, the Assistant Secretary for 
Legislation, or ASL, of HHS serves as a key liaison between Congress, 
the Department, and its sub-agencies. HHS is a sprawling department 
with policies affecting nearly every American, making Congress's 
oversight and engagement incredibly important.

    Medicare and Medicaid, two of the largest programs HHS oversees, 
fall within this committee's jurisdiction. Together, they account for 
more than one-fifth of all Federal outlays. When issues arise in these 
programs, the ASL is one of the first phone calls members and staff 
make. Responsiveness, transparency, and clarity in communication are 
therefore key attributes of any successful ASL.

    Dr. Egorin would bring substantial experience to the role from her 
background on the House Ways and Means Committee. As the Deputy Staff 
Director for the Health Subcommittee, she has partnered effectively 
with our staff on issues of bipartisan concern. Dr. Egorin, if you are 
confirmed, my staff and I look forward to our continued partnership in 
working to improve our health-care system.

    I request that each of our three witnesses today be detailed and 
candid in responses to our questions, both here and in response to 
questions for the record following this hearing.

    Mr. Chairman, thank you for holding this hearing today. I look 
forward to hearing from each of our nominees.

                                 ______
                                 
   Prepared Statement of Melanie Anne Egorin, Ph.D., Nominated to be 
  Assistant Secretary for Legislation, Department of Health and Human 
                                Services
    Chairman Wyden, Ranking Member Crapo, members of the Senate Finance 
Committee, thank you for considering my nomination to be the Assistant 
Secretary for Legislation. And thank you, Chairman Neal, for the 
gracious introduction.

    It is my honor to be nominated by President Biden to serve as the 
Assistant Secretary for Legislation at the Department of Health and 
Human Services under Secretary Becerra. As someone who has worked for 
the Federal Government--on Capitol Hill and at the Government 
Accountability Office (GAO)--for more than 15 years, it is especially 
humbling to sit before you today. I approach this position and our 
conversation today with humility and a continued commitment to serving 
the American people.

    I am the daughter of a physician-scientist who brought his 
collaborators home for dinner and his children to academic meetings. I 
grew up surrounded by my father, his colleagues, and students working 
to understand and treat cancer. They never forgot that each data point 
in their research was a person with loved ones also impacted by the 
disease.

    When I began my own career working with women with HIV, I saw how 
researchers and stakeholders used evidence grounded in the patient 
experience to advance policy and address health equity. My commitment 
to this approach and these issues is what brought me to Federal service 
and what remains the core principle behind my career.

    Throughout my 25-year career in health policy, the people helped 
and hurt by the health-care system are my cornerstone: my student 
working to complete his undergraduate degree while caring for his 
elderly grandparents; the nurse visiting Medicare beneficiaries to make 
their homes safe; the patient diagnosed with end-stage renal disease at 
23 while serving in the Army; the 15-year-old boy with a preexisting 
condition and his mother advocating to make sure his treatments are 
covered by insurance; and the coal mine workers on the precipice of 
losing their health coverage. I carry their voices with me and remember 
their stories while I do my work.

    The role of Assistant Secretary for Legislation is a unique 
intersection of responsiveness and collaboration between the executive 
and legislative branches of government. Throughout my career at GAO and 
in Congress, I have seen firsthand how important this role is. If I am 
fortunate enough to be confirmed, I will bring my breadth and depth of 
policy knowledge and experience to be transparent and accountable as 
Assistant Secretary for Legislation at the Department of Health and 
Human Services.

    I approach policy development and implementation from a pragmatic 
position that is filled with hope and the belief that we can do better. 
From my experience at GAO, and in my work at the Committee on Ways and 
Means, I understand the importance of taking a bipartisan, bicameral 
approach to policymaking. I recognize the importance of asking 
questions about current policies and programs to build on them and 
improve the health of the Nation, and our health-care system.

    I want to thank Chairman Neal, members of the Ways and Means 
Committee, and the numerous Representatives and Senators who have 
allowed me to work on their behalf, and with their staff, to craft 
policies that make our health-care system better--in very large but 
also very small ways.

    I understand and believe that successful bipartisan solutions help 
people. My colleagues--the current and former Hill staff with whom I 
have worked across the aisle and across the Capitol--thank you for 
working with me. We may not always agree on policy specifics, but we 
have consistently found ways to move forward on behalf of the American 
people. If confirmed, I look forward to continuing to work with members 
and their staff in this collaborative manner.

    The Department of Health and Human Services faces a broad range of 
challenges, from expanding health coverage, to caring for our children 
and seniors, to supporting innovation and scientific advancement, to 
responding to and recovering from COVID-19, which exposed many 
inequities I have worked to address throughout my career.

    I appreciate the opportunity that this administration has to work 
with Congress to tackle these challenges in a meaningful way. Given the 
impact the Department has on the Nation's health and economy, if 
confirmed, I look forward to continuing to serve the American people.

    As I conclude my testimony, I want to thank my spouse, Brian 
Tarleton, for building a life together that honors what is important to 
both of us, and our children, Atticus and Lorelei, for challenging me 
and forcing me to think about new ideas every day.

    My mother, Karen Egorin-Yaker, and my late father, Merrill Jon 
Egorin, would often admonish me and my brother that our actions reflect 
our upbringing. I hope my actions to date, and if I am confirmed as the 
Assistant Secretary for Legislation, reflect their strong belief in 
valuing diversity of thought and experience in solving problems as well 
as using one's knowledge, heart, and hard work to make the world 
better.

    Senators, I am happy to answer your questions today and, if 
confirmed as the Assistant Secretary for Legislation at the Department 
of Health and Human Services, for many years in the future.

                                 ______
                                 

                        SENATE FINANCE COMMITTEE

                  STATEMENT OF INFORMATION REQUESTED 
                               OF NOMINEE

                      A. BIOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION

 1.  Name: (include any former names used): Melanie Anne Egorin.

 2.  Position to which nominated: Assistant Secretary for Legislation, 
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.

 3.  Date of nomination: March 11, 2021.

 4.  Address: (list current residence, office, and mailing addresses):

 5.  Date and place of birth: September 14, 1973, Towson, Maryland.

 6.  Marital status: (include maiden name of wife or husband's name):

 7.  Names and ages of children:

 8.  Education: (list all secondary and higher education institutions, 
dates attended, degree received, and date degree granted):

        Franklin High School.
        Reisterstown, Maryland.
        September 1987-May 1991.
        High School Degree, May 1991.

        Emory University.
        August 1991-May 1995.
        Bachelor of Arts and Master of Arts, May 1995.

        University of California, San Francisco.
        August 1995-June 2004.
        Doctor of Philosophy, June 2004.

 9.  Employment record (list all jobs held since college, including the 
title or description of job, name of employer, location of work, and 
dates of employment for each job):


------------------------------------------------------------------------
                         Employer and
Title/Responsibilities     Location        Start Date        End Date
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Professional            U.S. House             01/2014          Present
 Congressional Staff     Committee on
                         Ways and
                         Means,
                         Washington,
                         DC
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Policy Staff *          U.S.                   06/2004          01/2014
                         Government
                         Accountabilit
                         y Office,
                         Washington,
                         DC
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Community Liaison       U.S.                   04/2010          07/2011
 Officer **              Department of
                         State,
                         Frankfurt,
                         Germany
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Research Analyst        Association of         09/2002          08/2003
                         American
                         Universities,
                         Washington,
                         DC
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Policy Analyst          University of          03/2001          08/2002
 (Student Academic       California,
 Services)               Office of the
                         President,
                         Oakland, CA
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Research Associate      University of          08/1999          08/2002
 (Department of Social   California,
 and Behavioral          San
 Sciences)               Francisco,
                         San
                         Francisco, CA
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Training Assistant      University of          06/1999          08/1999
 (SRTP)                  California,
                         San
                         Francisco,
                         San
                         Francisco, CA
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Research Analyst        University of          08/1998          12/1999
 (Office of              California,
 Institutional           San
 Research)               Francisco,
                         San
                         Francisco, CA
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Research Assistant      University of          09/1997          09/1998
 (Center for AIDS        California,
 Prevention Studies)     San
                         Francisco,
                         San
                         Francisco, CA
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Adjunct Faculty/        San Francisco          08/1998          12/2001
 Instructor              State
                         University,
                         San
                         Francisco, CA
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Research Assistant      University of          09/1996          05/1997
 (Commission on the      California,
 Future of Medical       Office of the
 Education)              President,
                         Oakland, CA
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Adjunct Faculty/        California             06/1996          12/1998
 Instructor              State
                         University,
                         Hayward (now
                         CSU East
                         Bay),
                         Hayward, CA
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Research Assistant and  University of          09/1995          11/1997
 Data Manager (School    California,
 of Nursing)             San
                         Francisco,
                         San
                         Francisco, CA
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Intern/Data Analytics   Centers for            05/1995          08/1995
                         Disease
                         Control and
                         Prevention,
                         Atlanta, GA
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Greeter and Server      TGI Fridays,           05/1995          08/1995
                         Atlanta GA
------------------------------------------------------------------------
* GAO detailee to Committee on Ways and Means (July 2012-December 2013).
** Concurrent appointment, no hours attributed to GAO,


10.  Government experience (list any current and former advisory, 
consultative, honorary, or other part-time service or positions with 
Federal, State, or local governments held since college, including 
dates, other than those listed above):

        N/A.

11.  Business relationships (list all current and former positions held 
as an officer, director, trustee, partner (e.g., limited partner, non-
voting, etc.), proprietor, agent, representative, or consultant of any 
corporation, company, firm, partnership, other business enterprise, or 
educational or other institution):

        Co-trustee of the Merrill Jon Egorin Revocable Trust (a family 
        trust).

12.  Memberships (list all current and former memberships, as well as 
any current and former offices held in professional, fraternal, 
scholarly, civic, business, charitable, and other organizations dating 
back to college, including dates for these memberships and offices):

        Professional Societies

        National Academy of Social Insurance 2021.

        American Sociological Association 1995-2004 (estimated).

        Pacific Sociological Association 1996-2004 (estimated).

        Sociologists for Women in Society 1996-2004 (estimated).

        National Association of Graduate and Professional Students 
        1996-1999; Program Committee 1997.

        Association of Institutional Research 1999-2004.

        Educational Organizations

        Brent Elementary School PTA 2008-2019; Board Member 2011-2012 
        (estimated).

        Stuart Hobson Middle School PTA 2016-2019.

        Washington Latin PTA 2019-present.

        School without Walls Home School Association 2019-present.

        UCSF Graduate Student Association 1995-2003 (estimated); Chair 
        1999-2000.

        UCSF Women in Life Sciences 1996-2004 (estimated); Seminar 
        Series Coordinator 1998-1999.

        Pan-Hellenic Organization

        Alpha Phi, Emory University Chapter 1992-1995; Greek Life 
        Advisor 1994-1995.

        Religious Organizations

        BethAm, Baltimore, MD 1973-2019.

        Hill Havurah, Washington, DC 2013--present (estimated).

        Community Organizations

        Arcadia Farm Center for Sustainable Food and Agriculture, 
        Alexandria, VA 2013-present.

        GreenSeed Community Garden 2016-present.

        Potomac Avenue Community Garden 2005-2009, 2011-2015.

        .DC Stitch 'n Bitch, Founder and Convener 2003-2009.

13.  Political affiliations and activities:

        a.  List all public offices for which you have been a candidate 
        dating back to the age of 18.

       N/A.

        b.  List all memberships and offices held in and services 
        rendered to all political parties or election committees, 
        currently and during the last 10 years prior to the date of 
        your nomination.

       N/A.

        c.  Itemize all political contributions to any individual, 
        campaign organization, political party, political action 
        committee, or similar entity of $50 or more for the past 10 
        years prior to the date of your nomination.

       See table.


------------------------------------------------------------------------
       Contribution Description               Date            Amount
------------------------------------------------------------------------
BIDEN FOR PRESIDENT                         10/08/2020           $98.39
------------------------------------------------------------------------
BIDEN VICTORY FUND                          10/08/2020           $98.39
------------------------------------------------------------------------
BETO FOR TEXAS                              09/28/2018          $100.00
------------------------------------------------------------------------
HILLARY VICTORY FUND                        10/11/2016          $250.00
------------------------------------------------------------------------
HILLARY FOR AMERICA                         10/11/2016          $250.00
------------------------------------------------------------------------
DCCC                                         10/9/2016          $100.00
------------------------------------------------------------------------
HILLARY FOR AMERICA                          10/9/2016          $100.00
------------------------------------------------------------------------
KYRSTEN SINEMA FOR CONGRESS                 04/19/2016          $150.00
------------------------------------------------------------------------


14.  Honors and awards (list all scholarships, fellowships, honorary 
degrees, honorary society memberships, military medals, and any other 
special recognitions for outstanding service or achievement received 
since the age of 18):

        National Academy of Social Insurance: 2021 (elected into 
        membership).

        Women's Congressional Staff Foundation Leadership Impact Award: 
        2020.

        Alliance for Health Policy Bipartisan Congressional Staff 
        Award: 2018.

        Aspen Institute/Commonwealth Fund Scholar: 2018.

        Stuart Family Congressional Fellow (Stanford University): 2018.

        Politico Emerging Health Care Leader: 2015.

        GAO Managing Director's Teamwork Award: 2007.

        UCSF Chancellor's Award for the Advancement of Women: 2000.

        UCSF Champion of Diversity: 1999.

        University of California AIDS Research Program Fellow: 1996-
        1998.

        University of California Regents Fellow: 1995-1996.

        Solomon and Sara Sutker Outstanding Undergraduate Award: 1995.

        Alpha Kappa Delta (international sociology honor society): 
        1994.

        Order of Omega (leadership honor society for members of Greek 
        organizations): 1993.

15.  Published writings (list the titles, publishers, dates, and 
hyperlinks (as applicable) of all books, articles, reports, blog posts, 
or other published materials you have written):

        Dissertation

        HIV Case Management Services and the Quality of Care Delivery. 
        Submitted June 2004. [No link available].

        GAO publications

        Medicare Special Needs Plans: CMS Should Improve Information 
        Available about Dual-Eligible Plans' Performance, GAO-12-864: 
        Published: September 13, 2012. Publicly Released: September 19, 
        2012.

        Ryan White CARE Act: Implementation of the New Minority AIDS 
        Initiative Provisions, GAO-09-315: Published: March 27, 2009. 
        Publicly Released: March 27, 2009.

        VA Health Care: Facilities Have Taken Action to Provide 
        Language Access Services and Culturally Appropriate Care to a 
        Diverse Veteran Population, GAO-08-535: Published: May 28, 
        2008. Publicly Released: May 28, 2008.

        VA Health Care: Recruitment and Retention Challenges and 
        Efforts to Make Salaries Competitive for Nurse Anesthetists, 
        GAO-08-647T: Published: April 9, 2008. Publicly Released: April 
        9, 2008.

        Medicare: CMS's Proposed Approach to Set Hospital Inpatient 
        Payment Appears Promising, GAO-06-880: Published: July 28, 
        2006. Publicly Released: July 28, 2006.

        Medicare Outpatient Payments: Rates for Certain Radioactive 
        Sources Used in Brachytherapy Could Be Set Prospectively, GAO-
        06-635: Published: July 24, 2006. Publicly Released: July 24, 
        2006.

        Medicare Inpatient Hospital Payments: CMS Has Used External 
        Data for New Technologies in Certain Instances and Medicare 
        Remains Primary Data Source, GAO-07-46: Published: September 
        26, 2007. Publicly Released: September 26, 2007.

        Not author but named discussant in publication

        Will Federalism Improve the U.S. Health Care System? Princeton, 
        New Jersey, May 21-23, 2019.

        Addressing Health Disparities in Medicare: Convening Report. 
        Better Medicare Alliance, December 2019.

        Original Articles and Letters

        Phillips, KA, S Fernyak, A Potosky, HH Schauffler and MA 
        Egorin, ``Do Enrollees in Managed Care Plans Obtain More 
        Preventive Services than Enrollees in Non-Managed Care Plans: 
        An Updated Perspective,'' Health Affairs 19(1), January/
        February 2000, pages 102-116.

        Phillips, KA, S Fernyak, A Potosky, HH Schauffler and MA 
        Egorin, Response to commentary in Health Affairs 19(3), May/
        June 2000, page 285. [No link available.]

        Academic Abstracts

        ``Evaluating Case Management for HIV-Positive Women with 
        Children,'' Health Research Service Administration, 2000. [No 
        link available.]

        ``Ethnic and Age Disparities in Surgical Treatment among Breast 
        Cancer Patients,'' Academy for Health Services Research and 
        Health Policy, 2002. [No link available.]

        Technical Reports

        Office of Institutional Research, University of California San 
        Francisco. The Graduate Division: Enrollment, Time-to-Degree 
        and Ph.D. Placement, prepared for the reaffirmation of 
        accreditation by Western Association of Schools and Colleges, 
        1999. [No link available.]

        Office of Institutional Research, University of California San 
        Francisco. Institutional Quality Assurance Portfolio, prepared 
        for the reaffirmation of accreditation by Western Association 
        of Schools and Colleges, 1999. [No link available.]

        Eversley, R and MA Egorin. HIV Case Management Needs in Alameda 
        County, prepared for the Alameda County Ryan White CARE Act 
        Title I and II Planning Council, 2000. [No link available.]

        Eversley, R and MA Egorin. HIV Case Management Administrator 
        Survey, prepared for the Alameda County, Ryan White CARE Act 
        Title I and II Planning Council, 2000. [No link available.]

        Eversley, R and MA Egorin. HIV Case Management Needs of Latino 
        and Latina Clients in Alameda County, prepared for the Alameda 
        County Ryan White CARE Act Title I and II Planning Council, 
        2000. [No link available.]

        Student Academic Services, University of California Office of 
        the President. Estimating the Number of Community College 
        Students Preparing for UC Transfer: Results from an Analysis of 
        the California Community College Student Database, 2001. [No 
        link available.]

        Student Academic Services, University of California Office of 
        the President. A Review of the Data Concerning the Academic 
        Performance of California Community College Students Following 
        their Transfer to the University of California, prepared for 
        the MOU Implementation Committee, 2001. [No link available.]

        Student Academic Services, University of California Office of 
        the President. Community College Transfer Students at the 
        University of California: 2002 Annual Report, 2002. [No link 
        available.]

        Student Academic Services, University of California Office of 
        the President Information Digest 2002: A University of 
        California Reference Guide, 2002. [No link available.]

16.  Speeches (list all formal speeches and presentations (e.g., 
PowerPoint) you have delivered during the past 5 years which are on 
topics relevant to the position for which you have been nominated, 
including dates):

        As is the custom for congressional staff, I have participated 
        in numerous panels and presentations that were ``off the 
        record'' and ``not for attribution.'' With few exceptions, 
        these events did not include prepared remarks, presentations or 
        other such materials. Below is a list of my speeches during the 
        past 5 years. Speeches with formal remarks are noted below and 
        copies provided.


 
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                       Speech Forum                             Date
------------------------------------------------------------------------
SHPYP Telehealth Summit                                         03/2021
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Association of Community Affiliated Plans Virtual Fly-In        02/2021
------------------------------------------------------------------------
National Minority Quality Forum                                 02/2021
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Credit Suisse DC Healthcare Policy Day                          02/2021
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Leavitt Partners DC Policy Forum                                01/2021
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Women's Congressional Staff Foundation Awards Ceremony*         12/2020
------------------------------------------------------------------------
BRG Health Leadership Conference                                12/2020
------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Four-Year Forecast for Healthcare Policy, Free the          11/2020
 Facts
------------------------------------------------------------------------
American Health Law Association                                 10/2020
------------------------------------------------------------------------
National Hospice and Palliative Care Organization               10/2020
------------------------------------------------------------------------
UBS Virtual Healthcare DC Day                                   10/2020
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Winston Scholars Symposium                                      10/2020
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Health and Aging Fellow Panel                                   10/2020
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Employer Benefits Council                                       09/2020
------------------------------------------------------------------------
McDonough School of Business at Georgetown University           03/2020
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Health Systems and Policy, Duke University                      01/2020
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Washington Innovation in Longevity Summit                       12/2019
------------------------------------------------------------------------
SEIU Panel                                                      11/2019
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Tax Issues for Health Care Organizations, American Health       10/2019
 Law Association
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Speire Healthcare Strategies, Medicare: 2020 and Beyond         10/2019
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Robert Wood Johnson Fellowship Alumni Retreat                   10/2019
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Winston Scholar Symposium Panel                                 10/2019
------------------------------------------------------------------------
UBS DC Day, Congressional Staffer Panel                         10/2019
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Medicare Advantage Summit, Better Medicare Alliance             07/2019
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Health and Aging Policy Fellowship Symposium Panel              06/2019
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Leadership Discussions on Supplemental Benefit                  05/2019
 Flexibility, Bipartisan Policy Center
------------------------------------------------------------------------
The 26th Princeton Conference                                   05/2019
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Congressional Health Committee Series, Women in Government      04/2019
 Relations
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NCCMP Lawyers and Administrators Meeting Health Care Panel      04/2019
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ACS CAN National Forum on the Future of Health Care             04/2019
------------------------------------------------------------------------
AdvaMed 5th Annual Payment Policy Conference                    04/2019
------------------------------------------------------------------------
23rd Annual Conference of the National Hispanic Medical         04/2019
 Association
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Value Based Insurance Design Summit (University of              03/2019
 Michigan)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ACAP Congressional Panel                                        02/2019
------------------------------------------------------------------------
HIMSS National Conference                                       02/2019
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Leavitt Partners Policy Forum: House Legislative Agenda         01/2019
 Panel
------------------------------------------------------------------------
National Hospice and Palliative Care Organization and the       10/2018
 Better Medicare Alliance Medicare Advantage Stakeholder
 Summit
------------------------------------------------------------------------
SNP Alliance                                                    10/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Winston Scholar Symposium Panel                                 09/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Girls in Politics                                               08/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Using Medicare to Improve Chronic Care: Opportunities and       05/2018
 Challenges, Bipartisan Policy Center
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Women in Government Relations Committee Series--House           03/2018
 Panel
------------------------------------------------------------------------
National PACE Association View of the Hill                      03/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Employers Council on Flexible Compensation                      03/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
HIMSS National Conference                                       03/2018
------------------------------------------------------------------------
American Academy of Actuaries, Annual Meeting Breakout          11/2017
 Session The Uncertainties in Health Care (part 1)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Women in Health Policy, Milken Institute School of Public       10/2017
 Health, George Washington University
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Better Medicare Alliance Convening on Achieving High Value      07/2017
 Care for Chronically Ill Medicare Advantage Beneficiaries
------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Jewish Federation of North America                          05/2017
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Urban Institute Risk Adjustment Summit                          05/2017
------------------------------------------------------------------------
National Renal Administrators Association                       05/2017
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ML Strategies 2nd Annual Pharmacy Industry Summit               04/2017
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Employers Council on Flexible Compensation                      03/2017
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Alliance of Community Health Plans Government Affairs           02/2017
 Engagement Day
------------------------------------------------------------------------
HGPII Best Practices Forum                                      10/2016
------------------------------------------------------------------------
SNP Alliance                                                    10/2016
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Premier MACRA Hill Panel                                        06/2016
------------------------------------------------------------------------
National Renal Administrators Association                       05/2016
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Non-traditional Career Pathways for Ph.D.s, Johns Hopkins       04/2016
 University
------------------------------------------------------------------------
National PACE Association                                       04/2016
------------------------------------------------------------------------
American Association of Nurse Practitioners                     03/2016
------------------------------------------------------------------------
* Prepared remarks given.


17.  Qualifications (state what, in your opinion, qualifies you to 
serve in the position to which you have been nominated):

        I, Dr. Melanie Anne Egorin, am honored to be nominated by 
        President Biden to serve as the Assistant Secretary for 
        Legislation at the Department of Health and Human Services. I 
        approach this position with humility and a continued commitment 
        to serving the American people.

        I have 25 years of health policy experience, including more 
        than 15 years with the Federal Government. I would enter this 
        role with a breadth and depth of policy knowledge of Federal 
        health programs and the American health system; a track record 
        of working in taking a bipartisan and data-driven approach to 
        my work; and over a decade of experience managing complex 
        operations.

        The role of Assistant Secretary for Legislation is a unique 
        intersection of responsiveness and collaboration between the 
        executive and legislative branches of government. If I am 
        fortunate to be confirmed as the Assistant Secretary for 
        Legislation, I will leverage my expertise in Federal health 
        policy, my deep knowledge of the legislative process, and my 
        commitment to making policy work for the American people.

        I have personally seen the role the Department of Health and 
        Human Services can play in innovation, treatment of disease, 
        and training of our workforce--locally and nationwide. This 
        perspective has anchored my career of working in Federal health 
        policy. Whether it was the NIH colleagues that collaborated 
        with my father on cancer and HIV research, the committed CDC 
        employees that I encountered during my time at Emory 
        University, the communities affected by HIV and barriers to 
        care that shaped my dissertation, or my doctoral training at 
        the University of California, San Francisco, I learned early 
        the importance of Federal support for innovation and research 
        as well as the training of our future health care and 
        scientific workforce. These early experiences of scientists, 
        doctors, and stakeholders working to make health care better 
        ground my commitment to following the data but not forgetting 
        the people behind the numbers.

        Over the course of my Federal Government service, I have 
        approached policy development and implementation from a 
        pragmatic, data-driven position. A hallmark of my work at both 
        the Government Accountability Office (GAO) and the Committee on 
        Ways and Means has been collaboration with stakeholders 
        including patients, providers, and employers, others in the 
        Government, and my colleagues across the aisle to improve the 
        health-care system for Americans.

        For almost a decade, I have worked for the Committee on Ways 
        and Means, first as a detailee from GAO, then as professional 
        staff, and now as a Deputy Staff Director. In this role, I work 
        closely with members from both sides of the aisle and their 
        staffs as well as my counterparts on other committees and 
        leadership offices to develop, draft, and pass legislation. 
        Working in a bipartisan manner, I have been involved in the 
        passage of key health legislation to address the pressing needs 
        of Americans including Medicare improvements in MACRA, 
        addressing the opioid epidemic in the SUPPORT Act, supporting 
        innovation through the 21st Century CURES act, and most 
        recently the numerous bills to address the health and economic 
        impacts of COVID-19. I have also worked in a bipartisan manner 
        to make incremental improvements to Medicare, such as extending 
        the comment period for Medicare Advantage, and health-tax 
        policy, such as including menstrual care products as tax-
        preferred account reimbursable items. Even working on more 
        partisan issues, such as the Affordable Care Act, as is the 
        nature of being legislative staff on the Hill, I have 
        maintained bipartisan working relationships.

        Data-driven solutions to complex problems guide my policy work 
        and have throughout my career. Taking this approach has allowed 
        for bipartisan conversations based on shared underlying facts 
        and policy refinement based on new data, often provided by the 
        administration at the request of Congress. Legislation to 
        improve access to preventive care in high-deductible health 
        plans, to strengthen consumer protections and maintain provider 
        networks while addressing surprise billing and make certain 
        special needs plans permanent while moving towards value-based 
        insurance design for Medicare Advantage are all a result of 
        this approach.

        My tenure at GAO also provided me with an understanding of the 
        importance of taking a bipartisan, bicameral approach to 
        policymaking and highlighted the important distinctions between 
        the House and Senate. In addition, the work of GAO highlights 
        the nuances between legislative intent and executive 
        implementation. At GAO, I produced timely, responsive, 
        nonpartisan materials that required working with both HHS and 
        congressional offices to provide the information needed to 
        strengthen and improve Federal health-care programs from 
        Medicare to Medicaid to the Veterans Health Administration.

        In addition to my pure policy and legislative expertise, I am 
        an experienced--and awarded--manager, mentor, and collaborator 
        adept at working across roles and responsibilities in complex 
        organizations. In the course of working as, and leading, 
        committee staff, I have developed a host of strategies for 
        working successfully with others with whom goals are shared but 
        reporting hierarchies are not. My past experience working with 
        other committees, individual member offices, leadership, or 
        often other branches of government, will prepare me to be a 
        responsive and collaborative Assistant Secretary for 
        Legislation at the Department of Health and Human Services.

        Given the breadth and depth of the Department Health and Human 
        Services and the impact the Department has on the Nation's 
        health and economy, I look forward to using my expertise and 
        experience to continue to serve the American people.

                   B. FUTURE EMPLOYMENT RELATIONSHIPS

 1.  Will you sever all connections (including participation in future 
benefit arrangements) with your present employers, business firms, 
associations, or organizations if you are confirmed by the Senate? If 
not, provide details.

        Yes.

 2.  Do you have any plans, commitments, or agreements to pursue 
outside employment, with or without compensation, during your service 
with the government? If so, provide details.

        No.

 3.  Has any person or entity made a commitment or agreement to employ 
your services in any capacity after you leave government service? If 
so, provide details.

        No.

 4.  If you are confirmed by the Senate, do you expect to serve out 
your full term or until the next presidential election, whichever is 
applicable? If not, explain.

        Yes.

                   C. POTENTIAL CONFLICTS OF INTEREST

 1.  Indicate any current and former investments, obligations, 
liabilities, or other personal relationships, including spousal or 
family employment, which could involve potential conflicts of interest 
in the position to which you have been nominated.

        Any potential conflict of interest will be resolved in 
        accordance with the terms of my ethics agreement, which was 
        developed in consultation with ethics officials at the 
        Department of Health and Human Services and the Office of 
        Government Ethics. I understand that my ethics agreement has 
        been provided to the committee. I am not aware of any potential 
        conflict other than those addressed by my ethics agreement.

 2.  Describe any business relationship, dealing, or financial 
transaction which you have had during the last 10 years (prior to the 
date of your nomination), whether for yourself, on behalf of a client, 
or acting as an agent, that could in any way constitute or result in a 
possible conflict of interest in the position to which you have been 
nominated.

        Any potential conflict of interest will be resolved in 
        accordance with the terms of my ethics agreement, which was 
        developed in consultation with ethics officials at the 
        Department of Health and Human Services and the Office of 
        Government Ethics. I understand that my ethics agreement has 
        been provided to the committee. I am not aware of any potential 
        conflict other than those addressed by my ethics agreement.

 3.  Describe any activity during the past 10 years (prior to the date 
of your nomination) in which you have engaged for the purpose of 
directly or indirectly influencing the passage, defeat, or modification 
of any legislation or affecting the administration and execution of law 
or public policy. Activities performed as an employee of the Federal 
Government need not be listed.

        N/A.

 4.  Explain how you will resolve any potential conflict of interest, 
including any that are disclosed by your responses to the above items. 
(Provide the committee with two copies of any trust or other 
agreements.)

        Any potential conflict of interest will be resolved in 
        accordance with the terms of my ethics agreement, which was 
        developed in consultation with ethics officials at the 
        Department of Health and Human Services and the Office of 
        Government Ethics. I understand that my ethics agreement has 
        been provided to the committee. I am not aware of any potential 
        conflict other than those addressed by my ethics agreement.

 5.  Two copies of written opinions should be provided directly to the 
committee by the designated agency ethics officer of the agency to 
which you have been nominated and by the Office of Government Ethics 
concerning potential conflicts of interest or any legal impediments to 
your serving in this position.

        I understand that my ethics agreement has been provided to the 
        committee.

                      D.  LEGAL ANO OTHER MATTERS

 1.  Have you ever been the subject of a complaint or been 
investigated, disciplined, or otherwise cited for a breach of ethics 
for unprofessional conduct before any court, administrative agency 
(e.g., an Inspector General's office), professional association, 
disciplinary committee, or other ethics enforcement entity at any time? 
Have you ever been interviewed regarding your own conduct as part of 
any such inquiry or investigation? If so, provide details, regardless 
of the outcome.

        No.

 2.  Have you ever been investigated, arrested, charged, or held by any 
Federal, State, or other law enforcement authority for a violation of 
any Federal, State, county, or municipal law, regulation, or ordinance, 
other than a minor traffic offense? Have you ever been interviewed 
regarding your own conduct as part of any such inquiry or 
investigation? If so, provide details.

        No.

 3.  Have you ever been involved as a party in interest in any 
administrative agency proceeding or civil litigation? If so, provide 
details.

        No.

 4.  Have you ever been convicted (including pleas of guilty or nolo 
contendere) of any criminal violation other than a minor traffic 
offense? If so, provide details.

        No.

 5.  Please advise the committee of any additional information, 
favorable or unfavorable, which you feel should be considered in 
connection with your nomination.

        N/A.

                     E.  TESTIFYING BEFORE CONGRESS

 1.  If you are confirmed by the Senate, are you willing to appear and 
testify before any duly constituted committee of the Congress on such 
occasions as you may be reasonably requested to do so?

        Yes.

 2.  If you are confirmed by the Senate, are you willing to provide 
such information as is requested by such committees?

        Yes.

                                 ______
                                 
    Questions Submitted for the Record to Melanie Anne Egorin, Ph.D.
               Questions Submitted by Hon. Maria Cantwell
                           basic health plan
    Question. Will you work with me to promote the Basic Health Plan 
and help more States to implement it?

    Answer. The Basic Health Plan is an innovative option for States to 
improve access to care and in line with the Biden administration goals 
of affordability and coverage for all. If confirmed, I would be happy 
to work with you on this.
                               telehealth
    Question. How would you approach the issue with payment parity for 
the various telehealth services? Which metrics would you use to 
evaluate the appropriate amount for reimbursements?

    Which methods would you use to promote telehealth literacy and 
expand access to technology for people who don't have them?

    How would you evaluate the quality of services provided and what do 
you plan to do to enforce these standards?

    Answer. Telehealth is an important tool to improve health equity 
and access to health care. Health care should be accessible, no matter 
where you live. If confirmed, I would look forward to working with you 
and my colleagues at the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services on 
this issue.

                                 ______
                                 
             Questions Submitted by Hon. Sheldon Whitehouse
    Question. Although COVID-19 increased health-care utilization in 
2020 and 2021, the Congressional Budget Office's February 2021 
projections estimate that Federal health spending over the next decade 
will be $6 trillion lower than it predicted in August 2010 for the same 
budget window. While a portion of the difference in health-care 
spending relates to the repeal of the individual mandate and other 
policy changes, much of it appears to result from a sustained slowdown 
in health spending growth in recent years. Despite this slowdown in 
spending, the Congressional Budget Office recently updated their 
projections for the Medicare Hospital Insurance Trust Fund, now 
estimating that the trust fund will face insolvency in 2024.

    What delivery system reforms will the administration advance to 
lower health-care spending and address Medicare insolvency before 2024?

    Answer. Medicare solvency is an incredibly important, longstanding 
issue. If confirmed, I look forward to working with Congress, and in 
concert with the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, on a 
bipartisan basis to address this. We will need both short-term and 
long-term strategies--including delivery system reform--to make sure 
Medicare remains a bedrock of our health-care system. It is essential 
that we protect and strengthen this program for Americans who have 
spent their lives paying into it.

    Question. The Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, through 
the Medicare Care Choices Model and the Center for Medicare and 
Medicaid Innovation, through a number of care models including the 
Primary Care First--Seriously Ill Population model and the NextGen ACO 
program, offer a number of waivers that would make the delivery of end-
of-life care more patient-focused. I've spoken with Center for Medicare 
and Medicaid Innovation Director Liz Fowler repeatedly about making it 
easier for states like Rhode Island to access the waivers available in 
these demos. I have legislation, the Removing Barriers to Person- and 
Family-Centered Care Act, to allow health agencies, ACOs, and other 
groups of providers to access these current waivers and to expand 
Medicare payments for additional end-of-life care services.

    Will you work with me to ensure that providers who take on adequate 
risk can deliver patient-centered end-of-life care?

    Answer. Thank you for your leadership on this issue. Making sure 
that all Americans have access to quality, affordable health care is 
one of the Biden administration's top priorities. If confirmed, I 
commit to working with you and my colleagues at the Centers for 
Medicare and Medicaid Services to examine rules and other policies to 
ensure all Americans can access the care that they need and choose, 
including at the end of life. I look forward to working with you on 
this important issue.

                                 ______
                                 
                 Questions Submitted by Hon. Mike Crapo
                       congressional consultation
    Question. The primary responsibility of the HHS ASL is to be a 
conduit of information between the Department and Congress.

    Will you commit to us to always communicate in a timely, clear, and 
responsive way to our inquiries?

    Answer. I deeply respect the oversight function of this committee 
for improving current policies and programs. If confirmed, I am 
committed to ensuring that the Department is responsive to oversight 
requests and provides Congress with the information that it needs 
consistent with appropriate law and regulation.
                     roles of majority and minority
    Question. As a longtime GAO staffer and a House staffer through 
periods in both the majority and minority, I trust that you have well-
developed views regarding the role of Congress in formulating health-
care policy.

    How do you see the role of Congress in influencing and shaping 
HHS's policymaking, including on the roles of both the congressional 
majority and minority of such policymaking?

    Answer. From my experience at GAO, and in my work at the Committee 
on Ways and Means, I understand the importance of taking a bipartisan, 
bicameral approach to policymaking and implementing the laws consistent 
with congressional intent. I recognize the importance of asking 
questions about current policies and programs to build on them and 
improve the health of the Nation, and our health-care system.
                        health-care innovations
    Question. Bipartisan collaboration, particularly among committee 
leadership, is important during crises. We saw this last year, when a 
divided Congress and the Trump administration took decisive action 
early in the year to make possible health-care innovations to mitigate 
the pandemic, despite the restrictions imposed by the national 
lockdown.

    As we approach the end of the public health emergency, which policy 
innovations do you think we should retain, and potentially make 
permanent in statute, as we continue to look to improve our health-care 
system?

    Answer. If confirmed, I will take a careful look at these policy 
innovations and other responses to the public health emergency along 
with my colleagues across the Department. I look forward to hearing 
more from you about what existing flexibilities you view as especially 
important and working with you to determine what legislative or 
resource needs there may be at HHS.
                     response review and timeliness
    Question. Concerning the White House, we have had several instances 
where we have sent letters to agencies and the responses have been 
delayed because the White House is reviewing the drafts. In another 
instance, shortly after a productive bipartisan conversation with a 
nominee about the value of waivers, the administration rescinded a 
previously granted waiver without notifying Congress. That circumstance 
demonstrated the importance of the ASL position, and how lack of 
communication can exacerbate the effects of a policy decision.

    Will you commit to advocate within the administration to be 
responsive to congressional inquiries, no matter who is asking the 
questions?

    Answer. I deeply respect both the majority and minority members of 
this committee. If confirmed, I am committed to ensuring that the 
Department is responsive to oversight requests and provides Congress 
with the information that it needs consistent with appropriate law and 
regulation.

    Question. Similarly, will you commit to advising Congress before 
sudden policy shifts to ensure the full impact of the change can be 
assessed, and any rationales for and against understood, before the 
decision becomes irreversible?

    Answer. If confirmed, I am committed to working with Congress on 
policy developments and implementation consistent with the law and 
appropriate regulations.

                                 ______
                                 
               Questions Submitted by Hon. Chuck Grassley
    Question. I am committed to protecting access to rural health care 
by boosting doctor pay, expanding access to telehealth, and protecting 
funding for rural hospitals. Over the last decade, at least 100 
hospitals across the Nation have closed. Congress recently established 
the voluntary Rural Emergency Hospital (REH) designation for Medicare. 
REH allows a Critical Access Hospital (CAHs) or a small, rural hospital 
with less than 50 beds to convert to an REH. The goal is to preserve 
access to emergency medical care in rural areas that can no longer 
support a fully operational inpatient hospital. It will let hospitals 
maintain essential medical services in their communities like 24/7 
emergency care, outpatient care, ambulance services, and more. It will 
also let certain rural hospitals right-size their health-care 
infrastructure. Recently, Senator Klobuchar and I sent to the Centers 
for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) a letter asking the agency to 
prioritize the implementation of this law.

    Can you commit to a timely and fair implementation of the Rural 
Emergency Hospital Program?

    Can I also have your assurance you will work with me to ensure the 
program is available to rural hospitals on January 1, 2023, as 
intended?

    Answer. Thank you for your leadership on this issue. I commit that, 
if confirmed, I will work with the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid 
Services on its rulemaking regarding the Rural Emergency Hospital 
Program and keep you regularly updated on its implementation. I 
recognize that rural areas have unique needs and challenges and I look 
forward to working closely with you on this issue.

    Question. On March 8, 2021, I wrote to the Department of Health and 
Human Services (HHS) and asked several questions relating to the 
origins of the coronavirus. I also asked about what, if any, oversight 
was done on the coronavirus grants sent by Dr. Fauci's unit within the 
National Institutes of Health to EcoHealth Alliance which issued sub-
grants to the Wuhan Institute of Virology. According to reports, 
$600,000 to $826,000 was sent to the Wuhan Institute of Virology by 
EcoHealth Alliance to study bat coronaviruses. On May 21, 2021, the 
Department of Health and Human Services responded to my letter but 
failed to answer whether any oversight was done. On May 26, 2021, I 
wrote a follow-up letter to HHS asking again what, if any, oversight 
was done. I have not received a response yet and the due date was June 
9, 2021. At a June 10, 2021, hearing, I asked Secretary Becerra about 
what, if any, oversight was done. He failed to answer. The Department 
has failed to explain if any oversight was done on how that money was 
used to ensure, as one example, that it wasn't used for gain-of-
function research.

    Given I was not able to get an answer from Secretary Becerra when 
he was before this committee on June 10th, I will ask you something 
related. If confirmed, what steps will you take to determine whether 
any oversight was done on the taxpayer money sent to the Wuhan 
Institute of Virology to ensure it wasn't used improperly and for gain-
of-function research?

    Answer. Thank you for sharing your concerns related to the origins 
of COVID-19. It is my understanding that Dr. Collins and Dr. Fauci have 
repeatedly said that the National Institutes of Health never approved 
funding for gain-of-function research at the Wuhan Institute of 
Virology. That said, there is a strong agreement for further 
investigation to understand the origins of COVID-19. As you know, the 
President has called for a report within 90 days from the intelligence 
community regarding the origins of COVID-19, and Secretary Becerra has 
requested that the WHO conduct a thorough, independent phase 2 
investigation of the virus's origins. If confirmed, I would work to 
support these efforts and ensure information is communicated to 
Congress consistent with appropriate law and regulation.

                                 ______
                                 
                Questions Submitted by Hon. Bill Cassidy
    Question. Can you please describe your protocol for processing 
technical assistance or other requests for information? How will you 
prioritize Republican members on the HELP or Finance Committees who are 
making these requests? Trump's ASL processed TA requests by seniority 
on the Committees, regardless of party.

    Answer. From my experience at GAO, and in my work at the Committee 
on Ways and Means in both the majority and the minority, I understand 
the importance of taking a bipartisan, bicameral approach to 
policymaking, including by providing technical assistance to make sure 
laws passed by Congress can be implemented by the administration. If 
confirmed, I will review prior protocols to make sure we are providing 
timely and responsive technical assistance to members and committees of 
jurisdiction.

    Question. How will you prioritize filling the roles that report to 
you, like the Deputy Assistant Secretary for Discretionary Health 
Programs, Mandatory Health Programs, and Human Services? What criteria 
are you looking for?

    Answer. I agree that a full team at ASL is critical to our ability 
to respond to the needs of Congress. It is my understanding that all 
the positions you mentioned are now filled, and if confirmed, I will 
work to ensure my team is both supported and responsive.

    Question. The Deputy Assistant Secretary for Oversight position was 
vacant for all of last year. How important is a full team?

    Answer. I agree that a full team at ASL is critical to our ability 
to respond to the needs of Congress and recognize that the Deputy 
Assistant Secretary for Oversight is an important part of that team. If 
confirmed, I will work to ensure the position is filled as soon as 
possible.

                                 ______
                                 
 Prepared Statement of Jayme Ray White, Nominated to be Deputy United 
  States Trade Representative (Western Hemisphere, Europe, the Middle 
 East, Labor, and Environment), With the Rank of Ambassador, Executive 
                        Office of the President

    Chair Wyden, Ranking Member Crapo, and members of the committee, I 
am honored to be here at this desk, in front of you. This is a truly 
special moment after spending many years sitting behind you on the 
dais.

    I came to Washington in 2000 to work for my hometown Congressman, 
Jim McDermott. Throughout a decade of service to Congressman McDermott, 
I helped guide his work on trade policy as a member of the House 
Committee on Ways and Means, and I learned valuable lessons about how 
trade affects working people.

    Since 2009, I have served this committee under Chair Wyden. I have 
represented this committee's legislative agenda and international trade 
priorities during three presidencies and in front of leaders around the 
world.

    I grew up in West Seattle, which is on the waterfront and home to 
the Port of Seattle, a gateway of international trade. As a kid, I 
delivered newspapers across the area and got a bird's eye view of the 
positive and harmful aspect of trade policy. The region is home to 
everything from trains and trucks to container ships and grain 
containers--all representing the hopes and dreams of workers, farmers, 
and families.

    I have never forgotten where I came from and the people I grew up 
with. I'm keenly aware of how the policy made here in Washington has a 
direct impact on the lives of people back in West Seattle. And if 
confirmed as a Deputy United States Trade Representative, I will 
continue to fight for American workers, the environment, and our 
economic prosperity.

    President Biden and Ambassador Tai have laid out a historic new 
policy approach centered around workers. Historically, trade, labor, 
and regulatory policy has been tilted in favor of corporations and the 
wealthy. Workers have not always benefited from government policy. The 
promises often didn't reach the factory floor and wages didn't go up, 
creating deep skepticism about the efficacy of trade policy.

    Ambassador Tai believes we need a different approach that gives 
workers a seat at the table--so their perspectives and voices are 
incorporated into the policy we develop.

    Recent history shows that this approach can bear fruit. Next week 
marks the 1-year anniversary of the United States-Mexico-Canada 
Agreement. USMCA proved that bringing all stakeholders to the table--
labor, workers, the business community, and members of Congress--can 
produce stronger trade agreements. The result was a bipartisan trade 
deal with overwhelming support from Congress that includes strong and 
enforceable labor and environmental standards; a new tool known as the 
rapid response mechanism that, when used, allows us to promptly raise 
concerns with the Mexican or Canadian Government when there are 
allegations of worker rights violations; and necessary and long-overdue 
intellectual property reforms to increase access to life-saving 
medication.

    I had the pleasure of working with Ambassador Tai during the USMCA 
negotiations while she worked for the House Committee on Ways and 
Means. When she talks about putting workers front and center in our 
trade policy, it isn't shallow rhetoric. It's a genuine commitment to 
lift up voices and communities we don't often hear from--or worse, that 
we overlook and exclude.

    That commitment was highlighted last week when Ambassador Tai and 
members of the Biden-Harris administration negotiated a resolution with 
the European Union and the United Kingdom to end the long-running 
Boeing-Airbus dispute. The deal suspends the tariffs related to the 
dispute for 5 years. And it will help American workers and American 
companies compete fairly, while we work with our allies to address 
common challenges from China and other non-market economies.

    As the son of two Boeing employees, this welcome news hits close to 
home, but I also know that many of the workers who will benefit from 
the deal are your constituents. You and your staff hear from them 
frequently--and you know how difficult this dispute has been. They 
should know that the deal shows how we can work with our allies and 
trading partners to confront the threats of this new age and shape 
trade policies that lift up workers, people, and communities that are 
often overlooked.

    If confirmed, I look forward to working with all of you to develop 
a worker-
centered trade policy that boosts our competitiveness and creates good-
paying jobs. Together, we can prove that trade doesn't need to exclude 
certain factions and communities. It can be inclusive, create shared 
prosperity, and help us build back better.

    Thank you for considering me for this position. I look forward to 
answering your questions.

                                 ______
                                 

                        SENATE FINANCE COMMITTEE

                  STATEMENT OF INFORMATION REQUESTED 
                               OF NOMINEE

                      A. BIOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION

 1.  Name (include any former names used): Jayme Ray White.

 2. Position to which nominated: Deputy United States Trade 
Representative.

 3. Date of nomination: June 9, 2021.

 4. Address (list current residence, office, and mailing addresses):

 5. Date and place of birth: February 22, 1973; Seattle, WA.

 6. Marital status (include maiden name of wife or husband's name):

 7. Names and ages of children:

 8.  Education (list all secondary and higher education institutions, 
dates attended, degree received, and date degree granted):

        Georgetown University, August 2005-October 2009. Master of 
        Public Policy Management. October 31, 2008.

        Georgetown University, August 2001-May 2003. Bachelor of Arts 
        in Liberal Studies. May 17, 2003.

        University of Washington, March 2000-June 2000.

        Seattle Central Community College, September, 1997-March 1999. 
        Associate of Arts. March 24, 1999.

        Highline Community College, Fall 1993-Fall 1995.

        South Seattle Community College, General Equivalence Degree 
        (GED). December, 1990 (estimate).

        Mount Rainier High School, Fall 1989.

        West High School, Spring 1989.

        Highline High School, Fall 1988.

        Bartlett High School, Spring 1988.

        Chief Sealth High School, Fall 1987.

        I did not take courses at South Seattle Community College; I 
        just took the GED exam.

 9.  Employment record (list all jobs held since college, including the 
title or description of job, name of employer, location of work, and 
dates of employment for each job):

        August 2009-present: United States Senate, Washington, DC.

        January 2014-present: Chief Advisor for International 
        Competitiveness and Innovation, U.S. Senate Committee on 
        Finance. Responsibilities: Lead advisor to the Chair on all 
        trade-related legal and policy matters.

        February 2013-February 2014: Legislative Director to Senator 
        Ron Wyden. Responsibilities: Lead advisor to the Senator on all 
        legislative activity before the U.S. Senate.

        August 2009-February 2014: Staff Director, U.S. Senate 
        Committee on Finance Subcommittee on International Trade. 
        Responsibilities: Lead advisor to the Chair of the subcommittee 
        on trade-related legal and policy matters, in addition to 
        special projects related to other matters, including banking, 
        tax, and technology.

        June 2000-August 2009: U.S. House of Representatives, 
        Washington DC.

        October 2006-August 2009: Legislative Director, Representative 
        Jim McDermott. Responsibilities: Managed and supervised the 
        Congressman's legislative agenda in general, but particularly 
        his efforts on trade, tax, and human resources matters as a 
        senior member of the House Committee on Ways and Means and as a 
        chair of one of its subcommittees.

        July 2001-October 2006: Legislative Assistant, and Senior 
        Legislative Assistant, Representative Jim McDermott. 
        Responsibilities: Led the Congressman's agenda on trade and tax 
        issues as part of his portfolio as a senior member of the House 
        Committee on Ways and Means.

        June 2000-July 2001: Staff Assistant, Representative Jim 
        McDermott. Responsibilities: Responded to stakeholders and 
        conveyed the Congressman's views to stakeholders and 
        constituents.

10.  Government experience (list any current and former advisory, 
consultative, honorary, or other part-time service or positions with 
Federal, State, or local governments held since college, including 
dates, other than those listed above):

        N/A.

11.  Business relationships (list all current and former positions held 
as an officer, director, trustee, partner (e.g., limited partner, non-
voting, etc.), proprietor, agent, representative, or consultant of any 
corporation, company, firm, partnership, other business enterprise, or 
educational or other institution):

        Sole proprietor and owner in a landscaping business, White 
        House Landscaping, April 1993-April 1994.

12.  Memberships (list all current and former memberships, as well as 
any current and former offices held in professional, fraternal, 
scholarly, civic, business, charitable, and other organizations dating 
back to college, including dates for these memberships and offices):

        The Golf and Country Club at Woodmore, June 2016-July 2017.

        Norbeck Golf and Country Club July, 2017-June 2020.

13.  Political affiliations and activities:

        a.  List all public offices for which you have been a candidate 
        dating back to the age of 18.

       April 2000-May 2000, candidate to be a WA State delegate for the 
2000 presidential election. I dropped out of the race after 
Representative McDermott offered me a job in Washington, DC at the 
Capitol and I moved to DC.

        b.  List all memberships and offices held in and services 
        rendered to all political parties or election committees, 
        currently and during the last 10 years prior to the date of 
        your nomination.

       N/A.

        c.  Itemize all political contributions to any individual, 
        campaign organization, political party, political action 
        committee, or similar entity of $50 or more for the past 10 
        years prior to the date of your nomination.

       N/A.

14.  Honors and awards (list all scholarships, fellowships, honorary 
degrees, honorary society memberships, military medals, and any other 
special recognitions for outstanding service or achievement received 
since the age of 18):

        N/A.

15.  Published writings (list the titles, publishers, dates and 
hyperlinks (as applicable) of all books, articles, reports, blog posts, 
or other published materials you have written):

        Seattle PI, Letter to the Editor, ``Elian Gonzalez--Boy may be 
        catalyst to re-start strained U.S.-Cuba relations,'' April 9, 
        2000. Attachment A.

        I wrote a few other Letters to the Editor that appeared in a 
        local neighborhood newspaper, the Magnolia News, and one in the 
        Seattle Times. Those letters, to my recollection, espoused the 
        benefits derived from trade liberalization. One to the Times 
        lamented the U.S. Senate's inability to approve an updated 
        Nuclear Test Ban Treaty.

16.  Speeches (list all formal speeches and presentations (e.g., 
PowerPoint) you have delivered during the past 5 years which are on 
topics relevant to the position for which you have been nominated, 
including dates):

        I gave informal, off-the-record comments throughout my career 
        to represent the views of Chair Wyden in my capacity as his 
        chief trade advisor. Our office policy is to represent those 
        views already expressed by Senator Wyden. I adhered to that 
        policy.

        I identified two panels that I spoke on at CSIS whose excerpts 
        appear online: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bTlu9M_RqxQ.
        https://www.csis.org/events/csis-roundtable-series-digital-
        trade.

17.  Qualifications (state what, in your opinion, qualifies you to 
serve in the position to which you have been nominated):

        The Deputy U.S. Trade Representative (DUSTR) assists the U.S. 
        Trade Representative in the development and coordination of 
        U.S. trade policy and conducting international trade and trade-
        related investment negotiations. The DUSTR assists in 
        negotiations at bilateral and multilateral levels, and 
        coordinates trade policy with other government agencies. In 
        addition to being an advisor to the USTR, the Office of the 
        U.S. Trade Representative was created by Congress to be 
        directly accountable to both the President and the U.S. 
        Congress.

        I have been a professional staff member in the U.S. Congress 
        for over the past 20 years, working on nearly every trade 
        matter that has come before Congress in that time. My 
        experience includes both trade committees of jurisdiction--
        House Ways and Means and Senate Finance. As the lead advisor to 
        the chairman of the Senate Committee on Finance, I engaged in 
        trade policy oversight and trade negotiations consultations 
        with two different administrations, including on the Trans-
        Pacific Partnership, the Transatlantic Trade and Investment 
        Partnership, the Trade in Services Agreement, the Environmental 
        Goods Agreement, the U.S.-UK negotiations, and the 
        renegotiation of the North American Free Trade Agreement.

        My experience on behalf of the U.S. Congress has prepared me to 
        assume the responsibilities of the DUSTR.

                   B. FUTURE EMPLOYMENT RELATIONSHIPS

 1.  Will you sever all connections (including participation in future 
benefit arrangements) with your present employers, business firms, 
associations, or organizations if you are confirmed by the Senate? If 
not, provide details.

        Yes.

 2.  Do you have any plans, commitments, or agreements to pursue 
outside employment, with or without compensation, during your service 
with the government? If so, provide details.

        No.

 3.  Has any person or entity made a commitment or agreement to employ 
your services in any capacity after you leave government service? If 
so, provide details.

        No.

 4.  If you are confirmed by the Senate, do you expect to serve out 
your full term or until the next presidential election, whichever is 
applicable? If not, explain.

        Yes.

                   C. POTENTIAL CONFLICTS OF INTEREST

 1.  Indicate any current and former investments, obligations, 
liabilities, or other personal relationships, including spousal or 
family employment, which could involve potential conflicts of interest 
in the position to which you have been nominated.

        In connection with the nomination process, I have consulted 
        with the Office of Government Ethics and the Designated Ethics 
        Official at the Office of the U.S. Trade Representative to 
        identify any potential conflicts of interest. Any conflict of 
        interest will be resolved according to the terms of an ethics 
        agreement I am entering into and that will be provided to this 
        committee.

 2.  Describe any business relationship, dealing, or financial 
transaction which you have had during the last 10 years (prior to the 
date of your nomination), whether for yourself, on behalf of a client, 
or acting as an agent, that could in any way constitute or result in a 
possible conflict of interest in the position to which you have been 
nominated.

        N/A.

 3.  Describe any activity during the past 10 years (prior to the date 
of your nomination) in which you have engaged for the purpose of 
directly or indirectly influencing the passage, defeat, or modification 
of any legislation or affecting the administration and execution of law 
or public policy. Activities performed as an employee of the Federal 
Government need not be listed.

        N/A.

 4.  Explain how you will resolve any potential conflict of interest, 
including any that are disclosed by your responses to the above items. 
(Provide the committee with two copies of any trust or other 
agreements.)

        In connection with the nomination process, I have consulted 
        with the Office of Government Ethics and the Designated Ethics 
        Official at the Office of the U.S. Trade Representative to 
        identify any potential conflicts of interest. Any conflict of 
        interest will be resolved according to the terms of an ethics 
        agreement I am entering into and that will be provided to this 
        committee.

 5.  Two copies of written opinions should be provided directly to the 
committee by the designated agency ethics officer of the agency to 
which you have been nominated and by the Office of Government Ethics 
concerning potential conflicts of interest or any legal impediments to 
your serving in this position.

        Copies have been provided to the committee.

 6.  The following information is to be provided only by nominees to 
the positions of United States Trade Representative and Deputy United 
States Trade Representative:

        Have you ever represented, advised, or otherwise aided a 
        foreign government or a foreign political organization with 
        respect to any international trade matter at any time in any 
        capacity? If so, provide the name of the foreign entity, a 
        description of the work performed (including any work you 
        supervised), the time frame of the work (e.g., March to 
        December 1995), and the number of hours spent on the 
        representation.

        No.

                       D. LEGAL AND OTHER MATTERS

 1.  Have you ever been the subject of a complaint or been 
investigated, disciplined, or otherwise cited for a breach of ethics 
for unprofessional conduct before any court, administrative agency 
(e.g., an Inspector General's office), professional association, 
disciplinary committee, or other ethics enforcement entity at any time? 
Have you ever been interviewed regarding your own conduct as part of 
any such inquiry or investigation? If so, provide details, regardless 
of the outcome.

        No.

 2.  Have you ever been investigated, arrested, charged, or held by any 
Federal, State, or other law enforcement authority for a violation of 
any Federal, State, county, or municipal law, regulation, or ordinance, 
other than a minor traffic offense? Have you ever been interviewed 
regarding your own conduct as part of any such inquiry or 
investigation? If so, provide details.

        No.

 3.  Have you ever been involved as a party in interest in any 
administrative agency proceeding or civil litigation? If so, provide 
details.

        Yes. In 1991, I was named as a plaintiff in a small claims 
        court case in Washington State related to a car accident. The 
        case was decided in my favor. The judgement was less than 
        $5,000 and I was never able to collect any money from the 
        respondent.

 4.  Have you ever been convicted (including pleas of guilty or nolo 
contendere) of any criminal violation other than a minor traffic 
offense? If so, provide details.

        Yes. In 1992, I received a summons and a fine in Oregon State 
        for using a fake ID in a bar to drink under-age when I was 20 
        years old.

 5.  Please advise the committee of any additional information, 
favorable or unfavorable, which you feel should be considered in 
connection with your nomination.

        N/A.

                     E. TESTIFYING BEFORE CONGRESS

 1.  If you are confirmed by the Senate, are you willing to appear and 
testify before any duly constituted committee of the Congress on such 
occasions as you may be reasonably requested to do so?

        Yes.

 2.  If you are confirmed by the Senate, are you willing to provide 
such information as is requested by such committees?

        Yes.

                              Attachment A

            Elian Gonzalez--Boy May Be Catalyst to Re-start 
                      Strained U.S.-Cuba Relations

         The Seattle Times April 9, 2000, Sunday Final Edition

    Elian Gonzalez may be the best thing that has happened to Cuba. The 
spotlight is once again now on U.S.-Cuban relations and it is time to 
re-evaluate foreign policy toward Cuba.

    If the 20th century taught the U.S. anything, it is that democracy 
and capitalism have prevailed and America no longer needs to live in 
fear of communism and socialism. Fear is not the hereditary trait of an 
American.

    The strategy behind the embargo was to make life so difficult for 
the Cubans that they would rise up and oust their leader, President 
Fidel Castro. That was more than 40 years ago. In actuality, our policy 
led to Cuba's isolation, crippled its economic development and 
solidified the perception that this misfortune is the doing of the 
United States, not their leader.

    The economic embargo on Cuba needs to be lifted. It is a failed 
foreign policy that has only hurt those it intended to help, the Cuban 
people. Lifting the embargo and allowing Cubans to see for themselves 
how Castro's economic and political system work in the new millennium 
will allow the Cubans to see the devil in the daylight.

    The people of Washington need to think about how the U.S. is 
treating Cuba and decide if, in good conscience, we should continue to 
repress Cubans because of our distaste for Castro.

Jayme White

Seattle

                                 ______
                                 
         Questions Submitted for the Record to Jayme Ray White
                 Questions Submitted by Hon. Ron Wyden
    Question. If confirmed, in addition to covering labor, your 
portfolio will cover the environment. Environment is critical in 
trade--both because we cannot allow a race to the bottom on 
environmental standards, which upends the playing field for American 
workers, and because environmental goods are a potential competitive 
opportunity for innovative American businesses.

    Can you describe how you see trade policy supporting the Biden 
administration's climate goals?

    How can USTR improve enforcement of environmental trade 
obligations?

    Answer. The President's 2021 trade agenda outlined and Ambassador 
Tai further reinforced that trade policy will provide the technical 
expertise and support for the whole-of-government efforts to combat 
climate change and realize the administration's goals of achieving net-
zero global emissions by 2050. If confirmed, I plan to review the 
environmental mechanisms outlined in our trade agreements to see how 
the United States can maximize their implementation and how to build 
upon models like the U.S.-Peru FTA's Annex on Forest Sector Governance 
that sought to increase governance, sustainable management, and 
enforcement of preventing illegal logging and trade in timber and 
wildlife products and the USMCA's Environment Cooperation and Customs 
Verification Agreement that expanded enforcement coordination and 
information sharing processes.

                                 ______
                                 
                 Question Submitted by Hon. Mike Crapo
                          g7 tax announcements
    Question. The administration continues to highlight that one of its 
major achievements is the G7 agreement regarding a global minimum tax. 
While there are limited details, the G7 press release states that 
members will remove digital services taxes in exchange for the 
reallocation of taxing rights of global companies, in addition to 
implementing a global minimum tax of 15 percent.

    I am deeply skeptical of the administration's reliance on other 
countries to enact a 15-percent global minimum tax. Critically though, 
I am also deeply disappointed that none of the countries have taken any 
serious action to roll back implementation or to suspend collection of 
their digital services taxes.


    How do you think the United States should respond if our trading 
partners make no effort to stop collecting discriminatory digital 
services taxes on U.S. firms?

    Answer. The Biden administration remains determined to resolve the 
digital taxation dispute in the context of the OECD/G20 process. I was 
pleased to learn of last week's agreement of 130 countries representing 
more than 90 percent of global GDP to support a global minimum tax of 
at least 15 percent. Secretary Yellen has called this a historic 
accomplishment that provides the opportunity to build a global and 
domestic tax system that lets American workers and businesses compete 
and win in the world economy. To provide more tax certainty, the 
agreement at the OECD calls for there to be appropriate coordination of 
the application of the new international tax rules and the removal of 
digital service taxes and other similar measures. I understand that 
discussion of these and other implementations issues will continue 
through October.

                                 ______
                                 
               Questions Submitted by Hon. Maria Cantwell
                             boeing-airbus
    Question. What steps will you and USTR take to ensure the full 
implementation of the agreements with the EU and UK addressing 
government support for large civil aircraft programs? How will USTR 
monitor compliance?

    Answer. The frameworks for cooperation agreed to with the European 
Union and United Kingdom establish working groups to overcome 
disagreements that may arise regarding the principles set out in those 
instruments. This includes the principle that each side intends to 
provide financing to large civil aircraft producers on market terms. If 
confirmed, I will made robust use of that mechanism to ensure that the 
EU and UK are living up to the high standard we have set.

    Question. What can USTR do to ensure that future European 
governments' supports to aerospace companies are administered on 
commercial terms, including those targeted to reduce aircraft 
emissions?

    Answer. Through the framework's working group, USTR can hold 
European governments to the principles set out to ensure that each side 
contributes to a level playing field, establishing fair competition for 
U.S. workers and producers. If confirmed, I will work to make this 
mechanism an effective and meaningful way to ensure that future 
government support programs are consistent with the findings in the 
underlying disputes.
                        europe and digital trade
    Question. Beyond dealing with foreign digital service taxes (DSTs), 
what is USTR's strategy on digital trade in Europe and how do we create 
new opportunities for American digital exporters?

    What is USTR doing to counter moves towards digital protectionism 
in Europe?

    Answer. My expectation is that USTR will, as part of the Biden-
Harris administration's focus on a foreign policy for the middle class, 
explore the ways in which digital trade rules can advance export 
opportunities for U.S. firms and U.S. workers. The United States and 
the European Union share the goal of combating digital 
authoritarianism. Trade rules that promote fair competition, including 
non-discrimination, allow parties with shared values to open markets 
and foster innovation.

    Question. What role will USTR play in the newly created U.S.-Europe 
Trade and Technology Council that was announced during President 
Biden's recent visit?

    Answer. Ambassador Tai is one the U.S. co-chairs of the Trade and 
Technology Council, along with Secretary Blinken and Secretary 
Raimondo. USTR will also participate actively in the working groups of 
the Trade and Technology Council, and expects to lead the working group 
on global trade challenges.

                                 ______
                                 
              Questions Submitted by Hon. Robert Menendez
    Question. As I said to Ambassador Tai in May, if the United States 
is going to successfully diversify away from China we'll need to deepen 
our trading relationships with our neighbors in the Western Hemisphere. 
And when it comes to addressing the challenges of migration in Central 
America, it's critical that we use all the tools at our disposal, 
including trade and economic development. If confirmed as the Deputy in 
charge of the Western Hemisphere, you will have a key role to play in 
that effort.

    What aspects of the CAFTA-DR agreement do you think need to be 
reevaluated so we can make the agreement more successful?

    Answer. CAFTA-DR is one of the United States' oldest and first FTA 
with a group of developing countries. It does not include the modern 
improvements of USMCA, especially as it relates to labor and 
enforcement. If confirmed, I would look for opportunities to maximize 
the full potential of the agreement.

    Question. Will you commit to consulting with my office on any 
review of the agreement or changes you might seek?

    Answer. Yes.

    Question. In the last month, Nicaragua's Ortega regime has arrested 
four presidential candidates and over a dozen prominent leaders from 
the private sector and civil society. We have not seen an authoritarian 
crackdown of this nature in our hemisphere in decades.

    Do you believe we should reconsider whether to continue to extend 
the benefits of CAFTA-DR to countries like Nicaragua that take such 
authoritarian actions?

    Answer. There are a number of actions that the United States could 
take against countries that take authoritarian actions and experience 
alarming declines in human and civil rights. Reviewing trade capacity 
building and assistance available under a trade agreement could be a 
part of that review.

    Question. Do you believe that the United States needs to 
incorporate standards into future free trade agreements to safeguard 
against the deterioration of democratic governance and the 
proliferation of corruption and human rights abuses?

    Answer. Yes.

    Question. Ambassador Tai said during her confirmation hearing that 
she would commit to ``close consultations with the Senate Finance 
Committee on trade negotiations'' and would work closely with the 
committee to identify ways to ``improve the flow of information in the 
development of trade policy.''

    Do you likewise make this commitment?

    Answer. Yes.

    Question. Since USTR has committed to follow the 2015 Guidelines 
for Consultation and Engagement, will you commit to seek input from the 
Committees on Finance and Ways and Means on U.S. text proposals before 
sharing them with other governments and commit to provide an oral 
update to this committee on the status of negotiations both before and 
after each negotiating session?

    Answer. I commit to follow the 2015 Guidelines for Consultation and 
Engagement, if confirmed.

                                 ______
                                 
              Questions Submitted by Hon. Thomas R. Carper
                     multilateral trade agreements
    Question. On June 22, 2021, the Finance Subcommittee on 
International Trade, Customs, and Global Competitiveness held a hearing 
to review the benefits of a multilateral approach to trade policy in 
the Asia-Pacific region. We heard from experts who advised us on how 
the United States can get its seat back at the table and actively work 
with our allies to form new agreements to boost jobs and economic 
growth in our country.

    Could you please share your perspective on the merits of a 
multilateral approach to trade policy in the Asia-Pacific region?

    Would you agree that the United States needs a strategy for 
reengaging our allies in the Asia-Pacific region on trade? If yes, what 
are the essential elements that must be addressed to ensure that the 
United States can successfully reengage in the region?

    Answer. If confirmed, I will work with Ambassador Tai to deepen 
trade engagement in the Asia-Pacific region. Specifically, I will work 
with our trading partners in multilateral settings, such as APEC, as 
well as in bilateral settings, to advance a worker-centered trade 
policy that represents a high-standard alternative to China's race-to-
the-bottom approach.
          usmca, the environment, and mexico's energy reforms
    Question. Concerns have been raised about Mexico's recently enacted 
electricity reform legislation and its potential to undermine new 
private investment in Mexico's renewable energy sector by American 
companies and others, and its potential to violate agreements set out 
in the United States Mexico Canada agreement.

    If confirmed, what steps will you take to ensure that environmental 
commitments in USMCA are upheld? Further, will you commit to monitoring 
this issue and to keeping Congress informed about any further action 
needed to address this issue?

    Answer. Full realization of the labor and environmental commitments 
of the USMCA are key to the agreement's success. If confirmed, I will 
meet with concerned stakeholders, review the status of implementation 
discussions, and connect with my counterparts in both Mexico and Canada 
to fulfill the intent and obligations of the agreement. Given the 
gravity of this important environmental work, I will consult with 
Congress.

                                 ______
                                 
             Question Submitted by Hon. Sheldon Whitehouse
    Question. The Trump administration failed to pair happy talk about 
the international fight against marine debris with meaningful action. 
I've been told that on several occasions, the U.S. government stood in 
the way of substantive international action on marine debris despite 
consensus among the other parties. While I was heartened by the 
inclusion of a marine debris provision in United States-Mexico-Canada 
Agreement, I am concerned that we still are not using our commercial 
power effectively as we work to combat marine debris.

    How do you plan to use the trade tools at your disposal to help 
with the fight against marine debris?

    Answer. I understand the importance of marine debris to you and 
other members of Congress, and if confirmed, I would welcome your 
advice on the opportunities and challenges of what role USTR may play 
in supporting broader U.S. government's efforts to reduce and prevent 
marine debris.

                                 ______
                                 
              Question Submitted by Hon. Elizabeth Warren
    Question. The Internet is a large and growing force in the U.S. 
economy and global trade. Big tech companies provide valuable products 
but also wield enormous power over our commerce, discourse, and data. 
As Congress and the administration address competition, privacy, and 
other issues with big tech companies domestically, it is important that 
our trade rules do not undermine our efforts, or those of likeminded 
countries like our European trading partners.

    Do you agree any digital trade policies must not undermine or 
forestall privacy regulation, disinformation prevention, or antitrust 
actions by the United States and its trading partners? Will you commit 
to engaging robust consultation with civil society actors on digital 
trade issues, as well as administration colleagues at the Federal Trade 
Commission and Department of Justice?

    Answer. I agree. While my portfolio would not include digital 
trade, my expectation is that USTR would engage in robust consultations 
with a wide array of stakeholders, including civil society, as well as 
government regulators, including agencies such as the Department of 
Justice that are part of the statutory interagency process, and the 
Federal Trade Commission, which is not.

                                 ______
                                 
                Questions Submitted by Hon. John Cornyn
    Question. When nominee Tai appeared before us, now 3 months ago, 
many Senators raised questions about the 25-percent section 301 China 
tariffs the last administration had reimposed in January, and many of 
us expressed our hope that USTR would act quickly to retroactively 
extend the exclusions and set up a new round for applications for 
exclusions. In her answers, she said, ``If confirmed, I commit to 
assessing the section 301 tariffs and exclusion process as part of 
President Biden's comprehensive approach to confronting the China 
challenge.''

    She appeared again 5 weeks ago, and Senators pressed her on when we 
could expect USTR to act. She answered, ``As soon as we can, and ensure 
that what we are doing has been thought through and is strategic and 
has a clear objective.''

    Last week, the Senate expressed its growing frustration with USTR's 
inaction by adding provisions to the Innovation and Competition Act 
that would compel USTR to retroactively renew exclusions and establish 
a new process to apply for exclusions. This legislative action comes 
after impacted companies and consumers have payed billions of dollars 
in reimposed tariffs, a full five months since the President was 
inaugurated, and three months after Katherine Tai was confirmed.

    Most of us would be happy for USTR to act administratively to 
address this issue in the very near term.

    Can you commit to addressing an exclusion process for these tariffs 
an immediate priority upon your confirmation?

    Answer. The U.S. policy toward China touches many facets of our 
engagement in international trade, including with respect to the 
regions--Western Hemisphere, Europe, the Middle East--and topic areas--
labor and environment--that, if confirmed, would be under my 
responsibility as Deputy U.S. Trade Representative. In that capacity, I 
will work to support the efforts of this administration and the USTR to 
pursue a China policy that achieves the goals of the Build Back Better 
agenda and a worker-center trade policy, including with respect to any 
tariff exclusions.

    Question. In May, USTR announced that it would support the waiving 
of intellectual property for COVID-19 vaccines and support text-based 
negotiations on a broader anti-innovation proposal from India and South 
Africa--longtime opponents of intellectual property protections. This 
was dramatic shift from our historic and longstanding support for 
stronger IP protections and enforcement globally. In other words, we 
are usually in the business of supporting American innovation and 
creativity, not supporting giving it away to our competitors.

    Since such a waiver of the WTO/TRIPS agreement is likely to 
undermine--not expand--existing manufacturing capacity issues and will 
come months after the U.S. has already donated its excess supply for 
the rest of the world, as Deputy USTR will you recommit this 
administration to this country's longstanding and bipartisan support 
for American intellectual property?

    Answer. The Biden-Harris administration has affirmed its support 
for strong intellectual property rules. COVID-19, as with prior global 
health crises, poses a particular challenge, both from a humanitarian 
perspective, as well as from an economic one. I share the Biden-Harris 
administration's goal of promoting strong rules that incentivize 
innovation, while doing all we can to ensure that to the extent those 
rules inhibit access to medicines, and the global economic recovery, we 
make appropriate adjustments.

    Question. One week from today will mark the 1-year anniversary from 
entry into force of the USMCA. Over the last year, however, Mexico has 
moved backwards here--and is now either non-compliant or threatening to 
take action that would make them non-compliant with the agreement in a 
wide range of issues that includes preferential treatment for state-run 
energy companies, regulatory delays for U.S. ag biotech and 
biopharmaceutical products, and local content quotas for film and 
television programming, among other issues.

    If this kind of disregard for the USMCA persists, will you support 
USTR taking enforcement action to protect America's commercial 
interests in the agreement?

    Answer. This January marked 27 years since NAFTA's entry into 
force. The USMCA includes new tools to address modern issues, and if 
confirmed, I plan to work closely with Ambassador Tai to fully 
implement the agreement and explore how the agreement's tools can be 
used to ensure that the parties fulfill their obligations.

    Question. During President Biden's visit to Europe, the White House 
announced it would participate in the U.S.-EU Trade and Technology 
Council (TTC). Ensuring fair competition is among the issues the TTC 
will focus on. Yet the EU has taken several unilateral actions that 
would significantly impact American companies' ability to compete in 
Europe; one example is the Digital Markets Act (DMA).

    As part of the TTC, are you prioritizing engaging with the EU on 
all unilateral regulatory actions to ensure American companies aren't 
unfairly discriminated against by DMA and other actions?

    Answer. Engagement with European partners on a broad range of trade 
issues is a priority of the Biden-Harris administration. Measures that 
appear to single out U.S. companies are always a concern of USTR, and I 
would expect both the Digital Services Act and the Digital Markets Act 
to be part of the discussion of digital governance in the Trade and 
Technology Council. It will be important to see if democracies can 
regulate the digital economy in a way that promotes fair competition, 
democratic values, and respect for human rights. If confirmed, I will 
consult closely with you as the administration works through these 
important issues.

    Question. The Comprehensive and Progressive Agreement for Trans-
Pacific Partnership (CPTPP) has entered into force without the United 
States. The agreement represents approximately half a billion people 
and 14 percent of the global economy. American companies were 
negatively impacted when the U.S. withdrew from the TPP agreement in 
2017. Joining the CPTPP would be a good opportunity for the U.S. to 
reclaim global leadership and write the rules of the road regarding 
trade, intellectual property, environmental and labor standards. It 
would also serve as an important foothold into key markets and help the 
U.S. compete against China.

    Do you support the U.S. joining the CPTPP or an equivalent Asia-
Pacific regional trade agreement? If not, can you explain why and what 
alternative you propose to help the U.S. counter China's rising 
influence and ensure that American exporters do not continue losing 
market share to their competitors?

    Answer. The Biden administration is prioritizing domestic 
investments to improve American competitiveness. I support this 
emphasis. The administration is also pursuing a worker-centric trade 
policy. By focusing on American competitiveness and ensuring that our 
trade policy achieves a broader base of support, the administration 
will, in my view, provide a foundation for pursuing innovative trade 
policies that achieve the twin goals of expanding opportunities for 
American exports, while ensuring that we address the harm to domestic 
workers and businesses from unfair trade practices. Striking that 
balance will lead to more durable agreements that facilitate our 
national security goals, in the Indo-Pacific region, and elsewhere.

    Question. Last week, I, along with Senator Tom Carper of Delaware, 
Senator Pat Toomey of Pennsylvania, Senator Dianne Feinstein of 
California, Senator Chris Coons of Delaware, and Senator James Lankford 
of Oklahoma, introduced the U.S-Mexico-Canada Foreign Trade Zone 
Modernization Act of 2021 or USMCA FTZ Modernization Act of 2021.

    This bill would require an investigation by the ITC on the NAFTA-
era, U.S. law restriction preventing products produced in FTZs that 
otherwise meet the rules of origin under that agreement from qualifying 
for reduced tariff benefits. This restriction places products 
manufactured in U.S. FTZs at a disadvantage compared to their 
equivalent counterparts in Canada and Mexico.

    If confirmed, would you be willing to initiate this investigation 
(precluding enactment of the bill) per the authority granted USTR under 
section 332 of the Tariff Act of 1930?

    Answer. The President has delegated the power under section 332 of 
the Tariff Act of 1930 to request reports and investigations of the 
U.S. International Trade Commission to the U.S. Trade Representative. 
If confirmed, I would advise Ambassador Tai on utilizing this mechanism 
to understand how trade policies can support the administration's 
agenda, including priorities such as promoting an inclusive economic 
agenda, the development and reinforcement of resilient manufacturing 
supply chains and the creation of good-paying jobs that support working 
families.

                                 ______
                                 
                 Questions Submitted by Hon. John Thune
    Question. Intellectual property protection promotes innovation, job 
creation, and economic development. It also provides a range of other 
benefits, such as helping develop the advances necessary for fighting 
COVID-19.

    You do not formally have IP enforcement in your portfolios but the 
administration has so far failed to nominate a chief IP negotiator. As 
a result, protecting U.S. innovators' IP and enforcing international IP 
rules will be part of your job.

    If confirmed, how will you ensure that American innovators and 
workers are not harmed by other countries undermining their IP 
protections?

    Answer. The United States is a supporter of strong intellectual 
property protections. The annual Special 301 report provides an 
inventory of intellectual property practices around the world that 
undermine these protections, and I intend to work to ensure that our 
trading partners address those concerns.

    Question. I remain concerned about the European Commission's 
inflexibility on new export certificate requirements on meat and dairy 
products. Given the requirements are set to take effect on August 21, 
2021, it is critical that USTR engage on the issue to best protect 
American farmers, processors, and exporters.

    If confirmed, will you commit to prioritizing this matter and 
updating me on USTR's progress on a resolution? How will you work to 
address this issue?

    Answer. I share your concern and your sense of urgency. If 
confirmed, I would push the European Commission to work toward an 
outcome that does not disrupt trade, such as an extension of the August 
deadline to allow more time for technical discussions.

                                 ______
                                 
                Question Submitted by Hon. Richard Burr
    Question. July 1, 2021 marks the 1-year anniversary of USMCA's 
entry into force. Over the last year, however, I have heard many 
concerns about Mexico's failure to implement its commitments on issues 
ranging from preferential treatment for state-run energy companies to 
regulatory delays for U.S. ag biotech and biopharmaceutical products to 
local content quotas for film and television programming.

    If these actions continue, what actions will you take to ensure 
Mexico is upholding its obligations under the agreement?

    Answer. U.S. companies continue to encounter market access and 
regulatory barriers in a number of different Mexican sectors. I noticed 
that Ambassador Tai already met with her Mexican counterpart twice this 
year, most recently in a bilateral meeting in advance of the inaugural 
USMCA Free Trade Commission meeting. If confirmed, I plan to continue 
robust engagement with both Mexico and Canada in full implementation of 
the agreement.

                                 ______
                                 
                Questions Submitted by Hon. Bill Cassidy
                                 cafta
    Question. I believe it is in the U.S. interest for Central American 
countries to have stronger economies with greater job development. 
Among other things, this has the potential to decrease irregular 
migration to the US. Since the US has a trade agreement with Central 
America that includes standards for environmental and worker 
protections but not with China, our Central American trading partners 
are at a competitive disadvantage.

    Do you think there might be ways to improve CAFTA to promote 
prosperity in Central America? If so, what are your thoughts?

    Do you have any other ideas about how we can promote stability and 
prosperity in our hemisphere?

    Answer. Resiliency and stability must be a hemispheric priority, 
and trade has a role to play. In February 2021, President Biden signed 
an ``Executive Order on Creating a Comprehensive Regional Framework to 
Address the Causes of Migration, to Manage Migration Throughout North 
and Central America, and to Provide Safe and Orderly Processing of 
Asylum Seekers at the United States Border.'' The so-called Root Causes 
of Migration Executive Order specifically named USTR as an agency to 
explore how DR-CAFTA could be used to discourage unfair labor practices 
and increase security, stability, and inequality in the region. The 
United States has free trade agreements with 20 countries, 13 of which 
are in the Western Hemisphere. If confirmed, I plan to review the 
agreements and use all the existing tools to advance environmental and 
worker protections to support the economic opportunity and the 
competitiveness of the United States and our neighbors.
                                  rice
    Question. Haiti is the number one market for U.S. milled rice, the 
majority of which comes from Louisiana producers. The capital, Port-au-
Prince, is currently experiencing its worst civil unrest in 15 years. 
Trucks and warehouses with U.S. rice are being looted, and vessels 
discharging U.S. rice are unable to dock. If future vessels are 
unwilling to call on Haiti, the result will be a disaster for the 
people of Haiti as well as for U.S. rice farmers.

    Does the U.S. Government have any plans to help Haiti settle the 
unrest?

    Is there any other information you can share with Louisiana rice 
farmers to help them navigate the situation?

    Answer. The political situation and the gravity of the pandemic 
have only exacerbated a very trying period in Haiti. Last month, the 
State Department issued a Level Four travel warning, which makes it 
more difficult for U.S. businesses exporting to Haiti, and for the 
people in Haiti trying to keep their loved ones safe, healthy, and fed. 
I continue to closely monitor the developments. If confirmed, I will 
work with my colleagues in the U.S. State Department and the U.S. 
Department of Commerce to better understand what trade tools and 
options are available.
                            usmca and mexico
    Question. One week from today will mark the 1-year anniversary from 
entry into force of the USMCA. Over the last year, however, Mexico has 
moved backwards here--and is now either non-compliant or threatening to 
take action that would make them non-compliant with the agreement in a 
wide range of issues that includes preferential treatment for state-run 
energy companies, regulatory delays for U.S. ag biotech and 
biopharmaceutical products, and local content quotas for film and 
television programming, among other issues.

    If this kind of disregard for the USMCA persists, will you support 
USTR taking enforcement action to protect America's commercial 
interests in the agreement?

    Answer. It is critical that the United States not only negotiate 
trade agreements that benefit U.S. workers, manufacturers, farmers, 
ranchers and fishers, but also that we fully enforce those agreements 
so that the benefits are realized. USTR has already taken strong action 
on that score, by initiating two reviews under the new rapid response 
mechanism for labor violations, requesting a panel proceeding with 
respect to Canada's compliance with dairy obligations, and engaging 
with both parties on a range of concerns with their implementation. If 
confirmed, I will support using all available tools under the agreement 
to advance U.S. interests.

                                 ______
                                 
                 Questions Submitted by Hon. Todd Young
    Question. I know the administration is focused on assessing and 
mitigating issues with our supply chain, evident by the recent report 
on supply chain resiliency. The report included a specific section on 
biopharmaceuticals and called out innovation as a key component in 
spurring the research and development that was needed for the COVID-19 
response. Innovators must have strong intellectual property protections 
to increase efficiency, maintain quality, and most importantly, save 
lives. Without these safeguards, research and development will no doubt 
plummet and hinder advancements needed to reach those in need.

    Do you believe that IP protections are a critical part of creating 
an environment conducive to innovation?

    If confirmed, how will you ensure that innovators can boost their 
supply chain resiliency and meet the recommendations set forth in the 
administration's supply chain report?

    Answer. If confirmed, I would work with Congress to enact the 
supply chain report's call for increased funding for research and 
development in a number of priority sectors. The report also highlights 
how there are strong synergies between domestic manufacturing 
production and innovation, highlighting the importance of making needed 
investments in the priority sectors.

    Question. Recently, the White House announced a new joint 
initiative with the EU, the Trade and Technology Council (TTC). Among 
its various goals, ensuring fair competition and establishing global 
trade standards for emerging technologies are among the issues the TTC 
will focus on. Yet, the EU has taken several unilateral actions that 
would significantly impact American companies' ability to compete in 
Europe; one example is the proposed Digital Markets Act, which would 
prevent market dominance by forbidding ``gatekeeper'' companies from 
undertaking certain actions. If this proposal were to become law in 
Europe, it is highly anticipated that this would subject major U.S. 
digital companies to various restrictions.

    How do you propose the U.S. should use the new TTC partnership as a 
strategic transatlantic response towards China's efforts to gain supply 
chain and technology dominance?

    Answer. Working more closely with fellow democracies to confront 
the economic and technological challenges posed by China is a core part 
of the Biden administration's strategic vision. The Trade and 
Technology Council is intended to help the world's two largest market-
based economies strengthen their cooperation on global trade and 
technology issues, with policies based in shared democratic values. 
Achieving this vision will require working through a number of 
difficult issues around data flows and the governance of digital 
platforms. Yet it is important to remember that a path that results in 
new forms of cooperation could generate a larger transatlantic market 
for products and services derived from new technologies that would help 
both the U.S. and the EU respond more effectively to competition from 
China.

    Question. In late May, the Senate voted to include the Trade Act of 
2021 to the United States Innovation and Competition Act, which would 
allow importers to obtain relief from section 301 tariffs imposed on 
certain products from China, including renewing and extending expired 
section 301 exclusions through December 31, 2022.

    If confirmed, will you commit to working with U.S. stakeholders, in 
coordination with Ambassador Tai, to reform the exclusion process and 
renew expired section 301 tariff exclusions with retroactive extension 
and/or another opportunity for applications?

    Answer. The U.S. policy toward China touches many facets of our 
engagement in international trade, including with respect to the 
regions--Western Hemisphere, Europe, the Middle East--and topic areas--
Labor and Environment--that, if confirmed, would be under my 
responsibility as Deputy U.S. Trade Representative. In that capacity, I 
will work to support the efforts of this administration and the USTR to 
pursue a China policy that achieves the goals of the Build Back Better 
agenda and a worker-center trade policy, including with respect to any 
tariff exclusions.

    Question. The administration recently announced suspension of 
tariffs for 5 years on a variety of U.S., EU and UK distilled spirits; 
however, the 25-percent tariff is still in place on American whiskey. 
As you know, adverse action on the distilled spirits industry harms job 
creators and employees in Indiana and many other states. Many of these 
jobs are located in rural communities in my State, like Borden, 
Lawrenceburg, and New Albany. With businesses attempting to recover 
from the pandemic, we should be looking to strategies that minimize 
harm to industries while seeking to hold countries accountable for 
unfair actions that hurts American manufacturers.

    If confirmed, how will you work to ensure a comprehensive solution 
that does not continue to harm the distilled spirits industry?

    Answer. The tariffs the United States placed on EU and UK distilled 
spirits were related to bilateral WTO disputes related to large civil 
aircraft and the countermeasures approved through that mechanism. The 
United States suspended those tariffs after coming to a framework 
understanding for addressing concerns in the sector and working 
cooperatively to counter non-market practices that undermine the 
industry on both sides of the Atlantic. The tariffs imposed on U.S. 
whiskey were imposed in response to the tariffs adopted under section 
232 of the Trade Expansion Act of 1962. This administration has started 
a dialogue with the EU on the mutual resolution of concerns in this 
area that addresses steel and aluminum excess capacity and the 
deployment of effective solutions, including appropriate trade 
measures, to preserve our critical industries. If confirmed, I will 
work toward a solution that maximizes the benefit to U.S. industry and 
minimizes any harm to unrelated sectors.

                                 ______
                                 
                 Questions Submitted by Hon. Ben Sasse
    Question. Trade Promotion Authority (TPA) expired on July 1st. TPA 
provides an important framework for the legislative branch and 
executive branch to work together to effectively negotiate free trade 
agreements, and other trade agreements.

    As DUSTR, will you support TPA renewal?

    Answer. USTR's worker-centered trade policy is designed to ensure 
that our foreign economic policies are responsive to the needs to 
everyday Americans, whether they work in the manufacturing, retail, 
agricultural, or services sectors. The goal of this approach is to 
establish a much broader base of support for trade, which in turn will 
create a more stable, durable system. It is my hope that this approach 
would, like USMCA, pass Congress with broad enough support that Trade 
Promotion Authority would be unnecessary. That said, whether to renew 
Trade Promotion Authority is within Congress' discretion.

    Question. The Biden administration has publicly said that their 
primary focus will be on a domestic agenda.

    If confirmed as Deputy United States Trade Representative, how will 
you outline the U.S. position with our trading partners and your 
counterparts in the Western Hemisphere, Europe, the Middle East?

    Answer. The administration is pursuing a worker-centric trade 
policy. To do that, we must begin with economic security for workers at 
home. The American Rescue Plan and the American Jobs Plan are designed 
to do that. The President has been clear that we will not enter new 
trade agreements until the necessary domestic investments have been 
made. It is my understanding that USTR is regularly engaged with our 
trading partners, and based on readouts of those meetings, our trading 
partners share our interest in devising trade policies that work for 
workers. I believe the various mechanisms available for engagement, 
including existing trade agreements and fora, provide opportunities for 
us to collectively build a broad base of support for globalization by 
ensuring that it works for all.

    Question. Have you thought about your first 100 days at USTR, and 
can you share your views on how you will prioritize issues?

    Answer. If confirmed, my focus in the first 100 days will be on 
engaging with our trading partners as part of the President's overall 
message that America is back. The President has emphasized the 
importance of bringing democracies together to address threats posed by 
non-market, authoritarian regimes. I intend to work with our allies to 
develop and execute trade policies that promote shared prosperity and 
contribute to a sustainable economic recovery. A worker-centric trade 
policy is essential to building trust in international trade, which is 
a prerequisite for creating durable policies that promote stability in 
our relationships with allies.

                                 ______
                                 
                 Questions Submitted Hon. John Barrasso
    Question. As the global economy begins to recover from the damage 
inflicted over the past year, many of our competitors are actively 
pursuing trade agreements to improve market access and secure a 
competitive advantage in key markets, especially in Asia. The United 
States, however, is taking a very conservative approach to trade 
negotiations. I believe this is a mistake and one we should correct 
quickly.

    Is it possible for the U.S. government to successfully negotiate 
free trade agreements without Trade Promotion Authority?

    Is there any good reason why the Senate Finance Committee should 
not prioritize reauthorization of TPA?

    Can the United States afford to fall behind our competitors by not 
securing free trade agreements?

    Answer. The President has made it clear that he will not sign any 
new trade agreements until the United States makes necessary 
investments here at home. Building back better will allow us to improve 
our competitiveness; our very ability to compete is a critical 
component of not falling behind others, but one that has not gotten 
sufficient attention in recent decades.

    USTR is pursuing a worker-centered trade policy. This policy is 
designed to ensure that our foreign economic policies are responsive to 
the needs of everyday Americans, whether they work in the 
manufacturing, retail, agricultural, or services sectors. The goal of 
this approach is to establish a much broader base of support for trade, 
which in turn will create a more stable, durable system. This approach 
would be premised on the view that, were Congress to vote, the margins 
in both Houses would be sufficient such that Trade Promotion Authority 
would be unnecessary. That said, whether to renew Trade Promotion 
Authority is within Congress's discretion.

    Question. The current world sugar market has incredible challenges, 
including trade distorting practices. It is more important than ever 
that the United States maintain sugar policies that stabilize the 
economic environment U.S. producers of sugar.

    If confirmed, and especially in light of the fact there is not yet 
a USTR Chief Agricultural Negotiator in place, will you work with your 
counterparts at the U.S. Department of Agriculture to prevent excessive 
importations of foreign sugar and unnecessary foreign access to 
domestic sugar markets?

    Can you describe, in detail, the decision-making process across 
USTR and the U.S. Department of Agriculture respect to sugar 
importation decisions?

    Answer. If confirmed, I commit to working with my counterparts at 
USDA to maintain the current practices that insure there is not excess 
imports of sugar into the United States. I will work very closely with 
my counterparts at USDA through formal interagency decision-making 
channels to coordinate on these efforts.

    Question. Strong intellectual property (IP) protections in the 
United States are critical for the invention and manufacturing of 
innovative medicines and medical technologies. It is not a coincidence, 
therefore, that the United States leads the world both in terms of 
inventing and manufacturing these products and providing intellectual 
property protections that incentivize innovation.

    The President has called for waiving Intellectual Property Rights 
(IPRs) for vaccines because of the global health crisis. I strongly 
disagree.

    At the same time, he has made it very clear that this 
administration believes the world is facing a ``climate crisis.'' On 
April 22nd, the President called on countries to ``step up'' and take 
further action on climate change in order to ``overcome the existential 
crisis of our time.''

    Do you think the COVID-19 pandemic is a crisis?

    Do you agree with the President that because of this crisis vaccine 
IPRs should be waived?

    Do you agree with the President that there is a climate crisis?

    Do you think we should waive American Intellectual Property Rights 
on green technology to combat the climate crisis?

    What's the difference?

    Answer. There are crises due to both the COVID-19 pandemic and the 
alarming and unstainable rate of climate change. They are separate but 
sadly and disproportionately impact underserved communities both in the 
United States and around the world. The President placed addressing 
these crises, enhancing relationships with our friends and allies 
around the world, and building a better, more resilient and equitable 
economy as priorities of the administration's whole-of-government work. 
This is the reason why all of these matters were included as core 
values and goals in the President's 2021 trade agenda.

    Question. U.S. businesses are often at a disadvantage vis-a-vis 
state-owned enterprises (SOEs) that are not guided by market 
principles. Such SOEs benefit from environmental, health and labor 
standards below that of publicly-traded companies. The uranium miners 
in Wyoming know this only too well, as U.S. mining has come to a 
standstill at the hands of increased imports from places like Russia, 
Uzbekistan, and other countries where the Chinese have significant 
mining investments. U.S. trade policy needs a clear strategy for 
addressing the SOE imbalance.

    Can you describe in detail how you would approach the challenges 
facing U.S. companies with respect to SOEs?

    Is USTR adequately equipped to address the SOE issue to ensure 
American workers and businesses have level playing field in the 
international marketplace? If not, can you explain where you think 
existing USTR authority falls short in this area?

    Answer. State-owned enterprises, particularly those in nonmarket 
economies, deny American businesses and their employees a level playing 
field. If confirmed as Deputy USTR, I commit to fully enforcing U.S. 
trade laws and agreements to address SOE unfair trade practices. I will 
also work with our trading partners in bilateral and multilateral 
settings to coordinate our trade enforcement efforts and negotiate new 
standards as necessary to discipline SOEs that do not operate according 
to market consideration.

                                 ______
                                 
                 Prepared Statement of Hon. Ron Wyden, 
                       a U.S. Senator From Oregon
    This morning, the Finance Committee meets to discuss three 
nominations for important roles in the Biden administration.

    Dr. Melanie Egorin is nominated to serve as the Assistant Secretary 
for Legislation at HHS. There aren't many people out there who know 
more about America's Federal health programs than Dr. Egorin does, 
particularly Medicare. Currently a top staff member at the Ways and 
Means Committee, Dr. Egorin also served as a Senior Analyst at the 
Government Accountability Office. That's a job that gives you a close 
look under the hood when it comes to Federal programs and agencies--
experience that will be highly valuable as Assistant Secretary.

    The Finance Committee is going to do our part to keep Dr. Egorin 
busy, if and when she's confirmed. For example, this committee is hard 
at work on legislation built around the proposition that every American 
must have mental health care whey they need it. Tens of millions of 
Americans are living with a mental illness today. Half don't get any 
treatment. There's a lot of work to be done, as the committee discussed 
in an excellent hearing last week.

    The committee is also working on bringing down the cost of 
prescription drugs. Americans are still getting clobbered every time 
they walk up to the pharmacy window. The committee is also hard at work 
on expanding home and community-based services across the country. All 
of these issues are going to require collaboration between this 
committee and HHS.

    Next are two nominees to serve as Deputy United States Trade 
Representatives. I'll begin with Sarah Bianchi, who is a longtime 
member of the Biden economic team. She's served in the Office of the 
Vice President, the Domestic Policy Council, the Office of Management 
and Budget, and here in the Senate as a staff member. She's played a 
key role in developing a strong Biden agenda focused on making the U.S. 
more competitive in the world and giving working people in this country 
a better chance to get ahead. The breadth of her policy experience is 
going to be a big asset for Ambassador Tai and USTR overall.

    Finally, somebody named Jayme White is also nominated to serve as 
Deputy USTR. Rumor has it he's a familiar face around here. Kidding 
aside, it's a pleasure for me to speak a little bit about why I believe 
Jayme is an excellent nominee--and it's not just because Jayme also 
hails from the Pacific Northwest, the son of union workers at Boeing.

    Jayme has worked on trade policy for more than 20 years on Capitol 
Hill. In 2009 I was fortunate to lure him away from his job working for 
his hometown representative, Congressman Jim McDermott. Since 2014 
Jayme has been the top trade and competitiveness advisor for the Senate 
Finance Committee Democrats. All in all, for more than a decade, I've 
had a front-row seat to watch Jayme move every trade negotiation and 
legislative proposal in a direction that gets better results for 
workers, for the environment, and for good government.

    For example, Jayme was focused on strengthening America's trade 
enforcement long before that topic was in vogue. He was the key 
individual building support for the ENFORCE Act in 2015 and 2016. Since 
it passed, Customs has used it to launch over 130 investigations into 
trade cheating that undercuts American workers. When the Trump 
administration's new NAFTA was weak on enforcement, Jayme and 
Ambassador Tai worked to make huge improvements. As a direct result of 
their work, USMCA raises the bar over any other trade agreement in the 
past in terms of enforceable commitments on labor rights and the 
environment.

    Jayme has been a leader when it comes to setting standards for 
digital trade that protect American jobs and innovation. He's also been 
a real champion of transparency and accountability in trade policy. It 
used to be that members of Congress, myself included, knew less about 
what was going on during trade negotiations than well-connected 
reporters and industry insiders. If members of Congress didn't have 
much access, then the American people were totally in the dark. We said 
that wasn't good enough, and to a great extent, Jayme is the person 
responsible for changing it.

    Among a host of improvements, members now have access to 
negotiating text while negotiations are happening, and pending 
agreements must be publicly available for at least 60 days before they 
can go to Congress for approval. That represents big progress that this 
committee can continue to build on.

    Bottom line, if you've got Jayme White on your team, you're running 
with the right crowd. He likes scoring trade policy wins for American 
workers, farmers, and businesses even more than he enjoys a good IPA. 
If and when he's confirmed, Oregon's loss will be the rest of the 
country's gain.

    So I want to thank all of our witnesses for joining the committee 
today and for their willingness to serve. I'll look forward to 
questions.

                                 ______
                                 

                             Communication

                              ----------                              


                 American Forest and Paper Association

                      1101 K Street, NW, Suite 700

                          Washington, DC 20005

                             (202) 463-2700

                        https://www.afandpa.org/

                                            Office of the President

                             June 22, 2021

The Honorable Ron Wyden
Chairman
The Honorable Mike Crapo
Ranking Member
U.S. Senate
Committee on Finance
219 Dirksen Senate Office Building
Washington, DC 20510

Dear Chairman Wyden and Ranking Member Crapo:

    On behalf of the American Forest and Paper Association (AF&PA), I 
am pleased to write in support of the confirmation of Jayme White as 
Deputy United States Trade Representative (USTR).

    AF&PA serves to advance U.S. paper and wood products manufacturers 
through fact- based public policy and marketplace advocacy. The forest 
products industry is circular by nature. AF&PA member companies make 
essential products from renewable and recycle resources, generate 
renewable bioenergy and are committed to continuous improvement through 
the industry's sustainability initiative--Better Practices, Better 
Planet 2030: Sustainable Products for a Sustainable Future. The forest 
products industry accounts for approximately four percent of the total 
U.S. manufacturing GDP, manufactures nearly $300 billion in products 
annually and employs approximately 950,000 people. The industry meets a 
payroll of approximately $60 billion annually and is among the top 10 
manufacturing sector employers in 45 states.

    Over the years, AF&PA has worked with the Office of the USTR on 
many trade-related issues. We believe that Mr. White is well-qualified 
to serve as Deputy USTR, with his two decades of experience working on 
nearly every major trade issue and trade legislation. We look forward 
to working with him on free and fair trade policies that advance the 
competitiveness of the U.S. pulp, paper, packaging, tissue, and wood 
products manufacturing industry and its workers.

    Thank you for your consideration. If you have any questions, please 
feel free to contact me.

            Kind regards,

            Heidi Brock
            President and Chief Executive Officer

                                   



