
 - THE BORDER CRISIS: IS THE LAW BEING FAITHFULLY EXECUTED?

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]


                    THE BORDER CRISIS: IS THE LAW BEING 
                           FAITHFULLY EXECUTED?

=======================================================================

                                HEARING

                               BEFORE THE

                  SUBCOMMITTEE ON IMMIGRATION INTEGRITY, 
                            SECURITY, AND ENFORCEMENT

                       COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY

                     U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

                    ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

                             FIRST SESSION

                               __________

                        WEDNESDAY, JUNE 7, 2023

                               __________

                           Serial No. 118-25

                               __________

         Printed for the use of the Committee on the Judiciary
         
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]         


               Available via: http://judiciary.house.gov
               
                                __________

                                
                    U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE                    
52-733                      WASHINGTON : 2023                    
          
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------     
               
                       COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY

                        JIM JORDAN, Ohio, Chair

DARRELL ISSA, California             JERROLD NADLER, New York, Ranking 
KEN BUCK, Colorado                       Member
MATT GAETZ, Florida                  ZOE LOFGREN, California
MIKE JOHNSON, Louisiana              SHEILA JACKSON LEE, Texas
ANDY BIGGS, Arizona                  STEVE COHEN, Tennessee
TOM McCLINTOCK, California           HENRY C. ``HANK'' JOHNSON, Jr., 
TOM TIFFANY, Wisconsin                   Georgia
THOMAS MASSIE, Kentucky              ADAM SCHIFF, California
CHIP ROY, Texas                      ERIC SWALWELL, California
DAN BISHOP, North Carolina           TED LIEU, California
VICTORIA SPARTZ, Indiana             PRAMILA JAYAPAL, Washington
SCOTT FITZGERALD, Wisconsin          J. LUIS CORREA, California
CLIFF BENTZ, Oregon                  MARY GAY SCANLON, Pennsylvania
BEN CLINE, Virginia                  JOE NEGUSE, Colorado
LANCE GOODEN, Texas                  LUCY McBATH, Georgia
JEFF VAN DREW, New Jersey            MADELEINE DEAN, Pennsylvania
TROY NEHLS, Texas                    VERONICA ESCOBAR, Texas
BARRY MOORE, Alabama                 DEBORAH ROSS, North Carolina
KEVIN KILEY, California              CORI BUSH, Missouri
HARRIET HAGEMAN, Wyoming             GLENN IVEY, Maryland
NATHANIEL MORAN, Texas               Vacant
LAUREL LEE, Florida
WESLEY HUNT, Texas
RUSSELL FRY, South Carolina

                                 ------                                

            SUBCOMMITTEE ON IMMIGRATION INTEGRITY, SECURITY,
                            AND ENFORCEMENT

                   TOM McCLINTOCK, California, Chair

KEN BUCK, Colorado                   PRAMILA JAYAPAL, Washington, 
ANDY BIGGS, Arizona                      Ranking Member
TOM TIFFANY, Wisconsin               ZOE LOFGREN, California
CHIP ROY, Texas                      J. LUIS CORREA, California
VICTORIA SPARTZ, Indiana             VERONICA ESCOBAR, Texas
JEFF VAN DREW, New Jersey            SHEILA JACKSON LEE, Texas
TROY NEHLS, Texas                    DEBORAH ROSS, North Carolina
BARRY MOORE, Alabama                 ERIC SWALWELL, California
WESLEY HUNT, Texas

               CHRISTOPHER HIXON, Majority Staff Director
          AMY RUTKIN, Minority Staff Director & Chief of Staff
                            
                            
                            C O N T E N T S

                              ----------                              

                        Wednesday, June 7, 2023

                                                                   Page

                           OPENING STATEMENTS

The Honorable Tom McClintock, Chair of the Subcommittee on 
  Immigration Integrity, Security, and Enforcement from the State 
  of California..................................................     1
The Honorable Pramila Jayapal, Ranking Member of the Subcommittee 
  on Immigration Integrity, Security, and Enforcement from the 
  State of Washington............................................     3
The Honorable Jerrold Nadler, Ranking Member of the Committee on 
  the Judiciary from the State of New York.......................     4

                               WITNESSES

The Hon. Chad Wolf, Executive Director and Chief Strategy 
  Officer, America First Policy Institute
  Oral Testimony.................................................     7
  Prepared Testimony.............................................    10
Aaron Reichlin-Melnick, Policy Director, American Immigration 
  Council
  Oral Testimony.................................................    21
  Prepared Testimony.............................................    23
Joseph Edlow, Managing Member, The Edlow Group
  Oral Testimony.................................................    35
  Prepared Testimony.............................................    37
Steve Bradbury, Distinguished Fellow, The Heritage Foundation
  Oral Testimony.................................................    40
  Prepared Testimony.............................................    51

          LETTERS, STATEMENTS, ETC. SUBMITTED FOR THE HEARING

All materials submitted for the record by the Subcommittee on 
  Immigration Integrity, Security, and Enforcement are listed 
  below..........................................................    00

Materials submitted by the Honorable Jeff Van Drew, a Member of 
  the Subcommittee on Immigration Integrity, Security, and 
  Enforcement from the State of New Jersey, for the record
    An articles entitled, ``Influx of migrants in Massachusetts 
        continues to overwhelm state resources--and more may be 
        on the way,'' May 10, 2023, The Boston Globe
    An articles entitled, ``1,500 Miles From The Southern Border, 
        Immigration Fight Disrupts Michigan Town,'' Sept. 14, 
        2021, NPR
    An articles entitled, ``City of Portland, social services 
        organizations overwhelmed by surging number of asylum 
        seekers,'' Jan. 26, 2022, News Center Maine
    An articles entitled, ``Like NYC, Chatanooga, Tenn. 
        overwhelmed by migrant surge from Texas,'' Aug. 16, 2022, 
        New York Post
A case document entitled, ``Third Presentment of the Twenty-First 
  Statewide Grand JuryRegarding Unaccompanied Alien Children 
  (UAC),'' Mar. 29, 2023, Supreme Court of Florida, submitted by 
  the Honorable Tom Tiffany, a Member of the Subcommittee on 
  Immigration Integrity, Security, and Enforcement from the State 
  of Wisconsin, for the record
Materials submitted by the Honorable Pramila Jayapal, Ranking 
  Member of the Subcommittee on Immigration Integrity, Security, 
  and Enforcement from the State of Washington, for the record
    A decision entitled, ``Legality of Service of Acting 
        Secretary of Homeland Security and Service of Senior 
        Official Performing the Duties of the Deputy Secretary of 
        Homeland Security,'' Aug. 14, 2020, U.S. Government 
        Accountability Office (GAO)
    A memorandum opinion, Casa de Maryland v. Chad Wolf, Sept. 
        11, 2020, United States District Court for the District 
        of Maryland
    A memorandum & order, Batalla Vidal v. Wolf, State of New 
        York v. Trump, Nov. 14, 2020, United States District 
        Court of Eastern, New York
    A statement from the Church World Service (CWS)
    A statement from Human Rights First, Jun. 7, 2023
A letter from Chad Mizelle, Senior Official Performing the Duties 
  of the General Counsel of the Department of Homeland Security, 
  Aug. 17,2020, submitted by the Honorable Tom McClintock, Chair 
  of the Subcommittee on Immigration Integrity, Security, and 
  Enforcement from the State of California, for the record
An article entitled, ``Listen to Children Who've Just Been 
  Separated From Their Parents at the Border,'' June 18, 2018, 
  ProPublica, submitted by the Honorable Veronica Escobar, Member 
  of the Subcommittee on Immigration Integrity, Security, and 
  Enforcement from the State of Texas, for the record

                 QUESTIONS AND RESPONSES FOR THE RECORD

Materials submitted by the Honorable Tom McClintock, Chair of the 
  Subcommittee on Immigration Integrity, Security, and 
  Enforcement from the State of California, for the record
    Questions and responses from Steven G. Bradbury, 
        Distinguished Fellow, The Heritage Foundation
    Questions for Joseph Edlow, Managing Member, The Edlow Group
    Questions and responses from the Hon. Chad Wolf, Executive 
        Director and Chief Strategy Officer, America First Policy 
        Institute

 
        THE BORDER CRISIS: IS THE LAW BEING FAITHFULLY EXECUTED?

                              ----------                              


                        Wednesday, June 7, 2023

                        House of Representatives

            Subcommittee on Immigration Integrity, Security,

                            and Enforcement

                       Committee on the Judiciary

                             Washington, DC

    The Subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 2 p.m., in 
Room 2141, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Tom McClintock 
[Chair of the Subcommittee] presiding.
    Present: Representatives McClintock, Buck, Biggs, Tiffany, 
Roy, Van Drew, Nehls, Moore, Hunt, Jayapal, Lofgren, Correa, 
Escobar, Jackson Lee, Ross, Swalwell, and Nadler.
    Mr. McClintock. The Subcommittee will come to order.
    Without objection, the Chair will be authorized to declare 
a recess at any time.
    The Subcommittee convenes today to examine the enforcement 
of our immigration laws. Prior to inauguration day, the border 
was secure. The laws were being enforced. The border wall was 
nearing completion. The Remain in Mexico policy had slowed 
illegal immigration to a trickle, and court ordered 
deportations were being enforced.
    Of course, all that changed when the new administration 
took office and immediately canceled the border wall, ended the 
Remain in Mexico policy, and ordered ICE to stop enforcing 
deportation orders.
    Since then, we have seen more than two million illegal 
immigrants deliberately released into this country, a 
population the size of the entire State of Nebraska. Meanwhile, 
more than million and a half known gotaways have also entered 
illegally, an additional population the size of Hawaii.
    Our previous hearings have documented the unfolding human 
tragedy of the border crisis. For Americans, it means 
classrooms flooded with non-English-speaking students, 
hospitals overwhelmed with illegal immigrants demanding care, 
fentanyl poisoning our young people, catastrophic strains on 
the social safety net meant to help Americans in need, criminal 
cartels and their affiliated gangs introduced into our 
communities, working wages suppressed by a flood of cheap 
illegal labor. Now we observe the irony of officials in so-
called sanctuary cities, like New York and Chicago, and 
sanctuary States, like California, warning that they cannot 
handle this influx.
    For the illegal immigrants, it means a harrowing ordeal 
subjecting them to exploitation by the criminal cartels, 
including sex trafficking, drug trafficking, and labor 
trafficking, even of small children. Many arrive in physical 
distress, destitute, and deeply in debt to their human 
smugglers. Thousands never make it. They die horrific deaths 
along the way.
    Well, now we raise the question why. Clearly our 
immigration laws are not being enforced by this administration. 
That fact is self-evident when we compare this administration 
to the last one.
    The law specifically provides that any asylum claimant 
shall be detained while their claim is heard. This is now 
routinely ignored.
    The law specifically provides that parole is to be granted 
only on a case-by-case basis for urgent humanitarian reasons or 
significant public benefit. This law is now being ignored, 
while parole is granted en masse to release many tens of 
thousands of immigrants illegally into our country.
    The law requires deportation orders to be enforced, yet, 
despite record numbers of illegal entries, we see the lowest 
rate of deportations in our history with more than a million 
deportation orders simply ignored.
    Federal courts have ordered this administration to enforce 
the law, yet time and again the administration seems reluctant 
to do so. Without enforcement, there is no immigration law. 
Without immigration law, there are no borders, and, without 
borders, we have no country.
    This crisis now reaches into every community and 
constitutes a clear and present danger to our national 
sovereignty, prosperity, and security.
    We Americans have always prided ourselves as being a Nation 
of laws and not of men, and yet it appears that our immigration 
laws are now routinely ignored, altered, or perverted by the 
whims of individuals within this administration. It's important 
in the inquiry today that we separate out policy differences 
from actual violations of law. The Founders anticipated that 
foolish people would sometimes occupy the offices of our 
government, and they left it to voters to correct 
maladministration at the ballot box. Lincoln put it this way: 
The voters are everything. If the voters get their back sides 
too close to the fire, they'll just have to sit on the blisters 
awhile.
    Mayor Eric Adams of New York City seems to be a poster 
child for this phenomenon.
    The more troubling question arises if this unprecedented 
illegal migration results not from incompetence and folly, but 
rather from a deliberate and calculated violation and 
subversion of the laws of the land.
    We need to determine what laws have allowed this calamity 
to befall our Nation. As the Legislative Branch of government, 
it's our duty to correct them. We also need to determine what 
laws are being willfully violated by those commanded to 
faithfully execute them. In that case, we need to identify who 
is responsible and what remedies are available within our 
system of checks and balances.
    With that, I am now pleased to recognize the Ranking Member 
for her opening statement.
    Ms. Jayapal. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
    Well, another week, another immigration hearing on the 
border. After using harmful rhetoric and fearmongering that 
ending the Title 42 public health policy would result in a high 
number of migrants coming to the border, we have seen a month 
where border numbers are down over 70 percent from their peak. 
As Politico put it, it is, quote: ``The migrant crisis that 
still hasn't arrived.''
    Unable to stoke media fears any further around the end of 
Title 42, it appears that my Republican colleagues have shifted 
their focus to the next attention-grabbing headline, laying the 
groundwork for the impeachment of Secretary Mayorkis.
    Despite this being our fifth immigration hearing in about 
five months, the majority is yet to call any witness from the 
current administration to testify before this Committee. It is 
no surprise that my colleagues have shifted to discussing if 
Secretary Mayorkis should be impeached. After all, extreme MAGA 
Republican Representative Marjorie Taylor Greene said just last 
week, in exchange for voting for the debt limit deal, she 
wanted some, quote, ``sides and desserts.'' Her, quote, 
``beautiful dessert'' was that--and this is a quote from her: 
``Somebody needs to be impeached.'' She specifically singled 
out Secretary Mayorkis as the, quote, ``lowest-hanging fruit.''
    Of course, my colleagues jumped at the chance to cater to 
the extreme MAGA Republicans in their party, and before the 
vote on the debt ceiling had even occurred, they noticed this 
hearing.
    According to a report from CNN just a few weeks ago, the 
Chair of this Committee, which would be tasked with launching 
impeachment proceedings, and GOP leadership have an 
understanding that the impeachment of Mayorkis is inevitable. 
According to the article, quote: ``It is not a matter of if; it 
is a matter of when.''
    Anyone who tuned into last April's Judiciary Committee 
hearing where Secretary Mayorkis testified as part of his 
oversight duties would not be at all surprised. Republicans on 
this Committee made their intentions quite clear. Mr. Johnson 
of Louisiana stated that Secretary Mayorkis had committed, 
quote, ``impeachable offenses.'' He went on to say, quote: ``My 
advice to you is to begin your search for a different career 
very soon because there will be an election.''
    Mr. Biggs of Arizona stated: ``You should be impeached.''
    Earlier this year, Mr. Biggs followed through on that 
statement and became the second Republican to file Articles of 
Impeachment against Secretary Mayorkis. That resolution is 
cosponsored by multiple Members of this Committee, including 
Mr. Gaetz and Mr. Nehls.
    Mr. Roy of Texas, who is not one of those cosponsors, even 
has a 13-page memo from October 2021 entitled, ``Case for 
Impeachment of Secretary Mayorkis.''
    Representative Ben Cline from Virginia, who serves on the 
Full Committee, told CNN that he has communicated to Chair 
Jordan that, quote: ``We need to start the process as soon as 
possible.''
    Last, when our Chair, Mr. Jordan, was asked in an interview 
in October of last year if the Secretary should be impeached, 
he said: ``Mayorkis deserves it.'' More recently, he said: 
``The Committee thinks it is,'' quote, ``warranted.''
    Now, of course, the idea of impeaching the Secretary is 
ridiculous. You do not impeach a Cabinet Secretary over policy 
disagreements. The border is not, quote, ``open.'' No 
administration has ever had complete, quote, ``operational 
control of the border, detained every asylum seeker, or not 
used parole in some form.''
    As a former Chair of the House Committee on Homeland 
Security, Chair McCaul of Texas said: ``Well, we talk a lot 
about operational control, and that's having a better 
understanding of who's coming in and who's leaving and what 
that threat really is. We're never really going to get that.''
    The Biden Administration is continuing to try to clean up 
the mess left by the previous administration. They're putting 
forward real workable solutions to manage migration and expand 
legal pathways. On top of the parole programs created by the 
Biden Administration earlier this year, the administration 
announced the creation of additional legal pathways that are 
intended to relieve pressure at the border.
    Now, it's not all perfect. In fact, some of my colleagues 
would argue that some of the administration's policies are too 
heavy-handed. Recently, the administration put forward a 
regulation which limits asylum, something many people within 
our Democratic Caucus are justifiably concerned about.
    Unfortunately, today's hearing appears to be the start of a 
sad new chapter for this Committee. Certainly, I look forward 
to hearing from all our witnesses today and the perspectives 
they bring on this issue.
    I yield back.
    Mr. McClintock. The gentlelady leads back.
    The Chair notes the presence of the Ranking Member of the 
Full Committee, Mr. Nadler, and recognizes him for an opening 
statement.
    Mr. Nadler. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
    Mr. Chair, it took just over five months, but the day that 
so many of my Republican colleagues have waited for has finally 
arrived. Today Judiciary Republicans are laying the groundwork 
to impeach the Homeland Security Secretary Alejandro Mayorkis.
    To be clear, they do not allege wrongdoing or malfeasance 
of any kind. They are simply catering to the most extreme 
Members of their caucus who have demanded impeachment of 
somebody, anybody, as the price of their support for the 
Speaker. They have decided to make their first target Secretary 
Mayorkis. Why? Because they have policy disagreements. No 
matter how much they may dislike him, that is not a basis for 
impeachment.
    Republicans are so desperate to begin impeachment, however, 
that they're evening jockeying for position on who gets to take 
the lead. Today's hearing, just like the first immigration 
hearing we held, appears to be the latest spat in the ongoing 
turf war between Chair Jordan and Chair Green of the Homeland 
Security Committee.
    Just a couple of weeks ago, Homeland Security noted that 
they are taking a lead role in building the case for 
impeachment through a quote, ``five-phase accountability plan 
before handing it off to the Judiciary Committee.''
    In furtherance of this plan, just this morning, they 
noticed the Full Committee hearing entitled, quote, ``Open 
Borders, Closed Case: Secretary Mayorkis Dereliction of Duty on 
the Border Crisis.'' Not to be outdone, Chair Jordan raced to 
announce this hearing to ensure that we beat the Homeland 
Security Committee by a few days.
    This is not a serious process. As Ranking Member Jayapal 
noted, we have still not had a single government witness come 
before the Committee on the issue of immigration. Instead, my 
Republican colleagues continue to hide behind the use of 
transcribed interviews to talk to agency officials, seemingly 
afraid to have public hearings. Despite all the evidence to the 
contrary, we are still hearing the same claims that we heard at 
our first immigration hearing this year, that the southern 
border is open, that President Biden and Secretary Mayorkis 
opened it deliberately, that it is mostly migrants who are 
smuggling drugs across our southern border.
    Yet, as my colleagues and I have discussed for months, none 
of these statements are true. Far from having an open border, 
the Biden Administration used Title 42 to expel migrants with 
no due process for significantly longer than many of my 
colleagues on the committee felt was appropriate.
    The administration also has recently enacted a new asylum 
regulation that we are concerned limits access to asylum. That 
regulation even earned the administration rare praise from 
Chair Jordan. These are not the policies of an open border. 
They are the opposite.
    My Republican colleagues have not once let facts get in the 
way of their Fox News talking points, certainly not the fact 
that encounters at the border have plummeted by 70 percent in 
recent weeks, thanks to new policies put in place.
    There is a lot that the Biden Administration is doing with 
immigration that I support. For example, the use of parole, 
expansion of legal pathways, revamping of the refugee program, 
and opening new regional processing centers in the hemisphere 
are all positive steps to repairing a broken immigration 
system.
    There are some policies I do not like, but that is the 
point: We have policy disagreements.
    You do not impeach a Cabinet Secretary because you do not 
like his policies. You work to pass legislation. You conduct 
oversight. You try to work in a constructive manner to convince 
your colleagues that you have the better argument. We need to 
work in bipartisan way to fix the immigration system, not just 
messaging bills that have no chance of being enacted into law 
and embark on a purely political impeachment process.
    I would note that we now know for certain that the 
Republicans' extreme, cruel, and unworkable border bill cannot 
pass the Senate. As part of the time agreement to ensure that 
we did not default for the first time in history, Senate 
Republicans demanded a vote on H.R. 2, the Republicans' border 
bill. The bill got 46 ``yes'' votes and 51 ``no'' votes, 
encountering bipartisan opposition. That bill is a nonstarter. 
Are my colleagues on the other side ready to sit down and 
discuss how we move forward with bipartisan immigration 
legislation?
    As I noted in our first hearing, Judiciary Committee 
Democrats stand ready to work on meaningful solutions to 
serious problems. Unfortunately, instead, it appears that the 
next side show is beginning today. Make no mistake, as the 
Ranking Member noted, it is clear that Chair Jordan and Members 
of the Committee have already made up their minds. Instead of 
serious solutions to solve complex problems, we will simply 
engage in more political theater.
    I look forward to hearing from our witnesses today, and I 
yield back the balance of my time.
    Mr. McClintock. All right. Just to put my Democratic 
colleagues at ease, administration witnesses could be called by 
the Committee Democrats. To date, they have chosen not to do 
so. I believe Mr. Mayorkis is scheduled to appear before the 
Full Committee in late July. It is a very, very big leap for 
merely asking why our laws are not being enforced to advocating 
something like impeachment.
    I would remind my friends that they are not our teachers. 
I, for one, would not seek to invent grounds for impeachment as 
the majority--or the former majority did in several 
proceedings. We're here to ask a very simple question: Why are 
our laws not being enforced?
    Now, I will introduce today's witnesses.
    The Honorable Chad Wolf is the Executive Director and Chief 
Strategy Officer at America First Policy Institute. He's also 
Chair of the Center for Homeland Security and Immigration at 
AFPI. Secretary Wolf was the Acting Secretary of the Department 
of Homeland Security. He's also a veteran of both Capitol Hill 
and the private sector. Secretary Wolf is a recipient of the 
U.S. Secretary of Transportation 9/11 Medal, the U.S. Secretary 
of Homeland Security Distinguished Service Medal, and the 
National Intelligence Distinguished Service Medal.
    Mr. Joseph Edlow is the founder of the Edlow Group, a 
visiting fellow at the Heritage Foundation, and a former Acting 
Director of U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services. Prior to 
that he served as the USCIS Chief Counsel and a Deputy 
Assistant Attorney General in the Office of Legal Policy at the 
Department of Justice. He is a veteran of Capitol Hill, serving 
as counsel on this Subcommittee and counsel to Congressman Raul 
Labrador. He began his immigration-related career as a trial 
attorney in the Baltimore Immigration Court. Mr. Edlow has a 
J.D. from the Case Western Reserve University School of Law and 
completed his undergraduate degree at Brandeis University in 
Waltham, Massachusetts.
    Mr. Steven Bradbury is a distinguished fellow at the 
Heritage Foundation and was the general counsel of the U.S. 
Department of Transportation from November 2017-January 2021, 
where he oversaw all of DOT's rulemaking and enforcement 
actions. He is also Acting Deputy Secretary of Transportation 
and briefly served as the Acting Secretary of Transportation. 
He was the Principal Deputy and Acting Assistant Attorney 
General for the Office of Legal Counsel at the U.S. Department 
of Justice during the George W. Bush Administration. Mr. 
Bradbury is a veteran of private practice and served as a clerk 
on the Supreme Court of the United States, as well as on the 
U.S. Court of Appeals for the D.C. Circuit. He earned a J.D. at 
Michigan Law School and a B.A. from Stanford University.
    Finally, Mr. Aaron Reichlin-Melnick is currently the Policy 
Director at the American Immigration Council, where he has also 
served as Policy Counsel and a staff attorney. Prior to that, 
he was a justice fellow in the Immigrant Justice Corps and the 
Legal Aid Society in New York. He earned a J.D. from Georgetown 
University Law Center and a B.A. from Brandeis University.
    I'd like to welcome all our witnesses today and thank them 
for appearing here. We'll begin by swearing you in.
    Would you please rise and raise your right hand.
    Do you swear or affirm, under penalty of perjury, that the 
testimony you are about to give is true and correct to the best 
of your knowledge, information, and belief, so help you God?
    Let the record reflect the witnesses have answered in the 
affirmative. Thank you.
    Please be seated.
    Please know that your written testimony will be entered in 
the record in its entirety. Accordingly, we would ask that you 
summarize your testimony in five minutes.
    Mr. Wolf, we'll begin with you.

                STATEMENT OF THE HON. CHAD WOLF

    Mr. Wolf. Chair McClintock, Ranking Member Jayapal, thank 
you for the opportunity to testify today.
    Today's hearing is titled, ``The Border Crisis: Is the Law 
Being Faithfully Executed?'' Unfortunately, the answer by any 
objective measure or metric is a resounding no. I understand 
the difficulty and the complexity of running the Department of 
Homeland Security, so I do not say this lightly. The U.S. 
Constitution requires the administration to, quote, ``take care 
that the immigration and border security laws be faithfully 
executed.''
    It is clear to me and to millions of Americans that the 
Biden Administration has failed to do so.
    Today's border security system is unrecognizable from the 
America First policies of the Trump Administration or even what 
was in place during the administrations of Presidents Clinton, 
Bush, or Obama.
    In all candor, the Biden Administration is the first 
administration of either political party to deliberately take 
steps to diminish the security along our southern border. 
Therefore, it is my opinion that new leadership is needed at 
the department.
    In contrast, under President Trump's leadership, the 
department established the most secure southern border in my 
lifetime by building the most advanced border wall system, 
reaching historic diplomatic agreements with Nations, and 
putting in place across-the-board policies that deterred 
illegal immigration, disrupted the Mexican cartels, 
disincentivized the deadly flow of fentanyl, and enforced the 
laws enacted by Congress.
    I think the results are clear. During the Trump 
Administration, fraudulent asylum claims declined, those who 
qualified for humanitarian relief faster. Lives were saved as 
migrants stopped taking that dangerous journey North when they 
realized they would not be allowed and released into American 
communities.
    In stark contrast, today we see a border not only in chaos 
but in crisis because the Biden Administration has dismantled 
all the proven policies. Recommendations and concerns by career 
Border Patrol experts were ignored, and political correctness 
and rank ideology supplemented common sense and adherence to 
our immigration laws.
    To be clear, these laws did not change between the Trump 
Administration and the Biden Administration, just the decision 
by this one not to follow those laws. They have embraced 
destructive and unlawful policies that have made American 
communities dangerous and have enriched the Mexican drug 
cartels.
    Here are a few examples:
    Nationwide catch and release. The Biden Administration has 
intentionally decided to ignore its legal mandate to detain 
illegal aliens or to make them wait in Mexico throughout their 
immigration court proceedings, and a Federal District Judge has 
struck down this practice.
    DHS was then unable to process the volumes of illegal 
aliens fast enough under this catch-and-release scheme, so it 
resorted to issuing Notices to Report. These are essentially an 
honor system document that asks illegal aliens to self-report 
to a local ICE office when they reach their final destination. 
Again, the courts have blocked the implementation of this 
practice.
    Next, a de facto amnesty. On day one, the Biden 
Administration issued a 100-day deportation freeze on all 
illegal aliens, including those with criminal convictions. Let 
me say that again: Including those with criminal convictions. 
Again, a Federal judge has blocked the nullification of this 
interior enforcement.
    Another de facto amnesty of this administration is when the 
DHS Secretary's enforcement priorities exempt 99 percent of 
illegal aliens from the threat of deportation, including the 
declaration that being here unlawfully is no longer grounds for 
removal.
    Perhaps the most egregious example of violating the law is 
the unlawful use of parole authority. The INA could not be 
clearer that parole is a remarkably narrow authority and only 
allowable on a case-by-case basis. The numerous unlawful 
categorical parole programs that the department has implemented 
are not new, safe, or legal pathways, but a diversion of 
illegal aliens between ports of entry to ports of entry.
    It is very clear that the current administration is lying 
to the American people about the severity of the problem, so 
here's the reality. Large-scale catch-and-release policy has 
resulted in more than 4.5 million illegal aliens, including 1.5 
million gotaways, being allowed into American communities. That 
is a population larger than every major U.S. city, except for 
New York City. There have been more than 200 known or suspected 
terrorists apprehended at the southern border in the last two 
years, compared to just 11 during the four-years of the Trump 
Administration. The border is effectively controlled by the 
Mexican cartels who crave these open border policies to further 
their business model. More migrants have been found dead in the 
desert or have drowned in the river during the journey than 
ever before. According to The New York Times, the Biden 
Administration has lost contact with more than 85,000 children 
after releasing them to sponsors here in the U.S.
    These are the results of a process that the administration 
calls safe, orderly, and humane. To whom exactly? Not to the 
migrants being abused, extorted, or dying along the journey, 
not to the American communities that have been overrun, and not 
to Border Patrol officers who have been assaulted. Instead, the 
processes that have been created over the last two years can be 
more accurately described as dangerous, corrupt, and inhumane. 
These policies are unlawful, and this is a crisis by design.
    Thank you. Look forward to the questions.
    [The prepared statement of the Hon. Wolf follows:]
    [GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
    
    Mr. McClintock. Thank you for your testimony.
    Next is Mr. Reichlin-Melnick.

              STATEMENT OF AARON REICHLIN-MELNICK

    Mr. Reichlin-Melnick. Chair McClintock, Ranking Member 
Jayapal, and distinguished Members of the Subcommittee. My name 
is Aaron Reichlin-Melnick, and I'm Policy Director at the 
American Immigration Council, a nonprofit organization 
dedicated to the belief that immigrants are part of our 
national fabric and to ensuring that the United States provides 
a fair process for all immigrants, including those seeking 
protection.
    I'm grateful for the opportunity to be here today to help 
provide some perspective on the complicated reality of the 
application of immigration law at the border.
    At the council, we have long brought attention through 
research, advocacy, and litigation to ways in which the 
Executive Branch carries out immigration enforcement. We are 
intimately familiar with the complex legal and practical 
considerations involved in the processing of migrants and have 
brought successful litigation against both Democratic and 
Republican Administrations to ensure that DHS is following the 
law.
    The Constitution charges the President with faithfully 
executing the laws. Unfortunately, for the President, Congress 
often passes law which impose competing legal requirements on 
the Executive Branch. Some laws are easier to execute than 
others, especially in a world of limited resources. These 
challenges are readily apparent for immigration enforcement.
    As Justice Kavanaugh noted at oral arguments in Texas v. 
U.S. last November, there are never enough resources to detain 
every person who should be detained, arrest every person who 
should be arrested, or prosecute every person who's violated 
the law.
    Because of this hard reality, immigration officials have 
always been imbued with broad legal authority and with broad 
discretion in carrying out immigration enforcement. None other 
than Justice Scalia said in 1999 that, at each stage of the 
removal process, the Executive has the discretion to abandon 
the endeavor.
    At the border, these countervailing concerns are critical. 
CBP officers are charged with simultaneously carrying out 
enforcement laws and humanitarian laws such as asylum, and not 
every person can be treated the same. There is no one-size-
fits-all legal process for migrants. For example, the options 
available for processing a single adult arriving from Mexico 
arriving alone are different than those available for 
processing an asylum seeker from Cuba arriving with a baby. 
Some people can be rapidly issued an order of removal and 
deported. Others may require a full asylum screening, which 
takes time and resources.
    Beyond the law, Congressional appropriations are finite, so 
there are logistical limits that are just as important as legal 
mandates. The use of detention is a perfect example of this. 
Despite laws which on their face seemly mandate detention, 
Congress has never provided sufficient resources to detain 
every person who might be subject to mandatory detention. As a 
result, if there are 10 people who the law says should be 
detained and only five ICE detention beds available, CBP must 
by necessity release the other five. Thus, immigration 
officials under Republican and Democratic Administrations alike 
have released some migrants, because, while a single law might 
suggest they be detained, the laws in total provide alternate 
options.
    These limitations apply to all administrations. For 
example, data produced by the Department of Homeland Security 
revealed that over 1.1 million migrants were released under the 
Trump Administration in total, including over 500,000 released 
at the border by CBP. Like today, these releases do not 
represent a failure to execute the law; rather, they are a 
natural and lawful byproduct of competing legal and logistical 
considerations that all law enforcement agencies grapple with.
    Faced with a growing global displacement crisis, the Biden 
Administration has undoubtedly struggled to manage with the 
resources they have. This struggle is not unique to the Biden 
Administration, nor is it a sign of administration undermining 
the law. Instead, it is a result of outdated laws and a funding 
model that is badly out of balance. There are two million cases 
in the immigration court backlog, yet today we spend $8 on 
immigration enforcement for every $1 we spend on immigration 
adjudication.
    The last administration spent $15 billion on a border wall. 
That's enough to pay for 17.5 years of the current immigration 
court budget. So, it's not a surprise then that the system is 
not functioning as designed and that it takes years for the 
government to determine who qualifies for asylum and who does 
not.
    Moving forward, I urge Congress to undertake the difficult 
challenge of updating our immigration laws and providing enough 
resources to our adjudication systems to ensure that chaos at 
the border becomes a thing of the past. Congress cannot tell 
the Executive Branch to do three things, give them enough money 
to do none of them adequately, and then blame the Executive if 
it doesn't like the result.
    Thank you. I look forward to your questions.
    [The prepared statement of Mr. Reichlin-Melnick follows:]
    [GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
    
    Mr. McClintock. Thank you very much.
    Next is Mr. Edlow.

                   STATEMENT OF JOSEPH EDLOW

    Mr. Edlow. Thank you.
    Chair McClintock, Ranking Member Jayapal, and distinguished 
Members of this Subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to 
present testimony regarding the ongoing crisis threatening the 
integrity of our immigration system.
    As this Committee explores the underlying causes of the 
crisis, the question posed today can be answered only with a 
resounding no. The Biden Administration has seen fit to ignore 
the law, instead favoring poorly conceived and poorly executed 
policy decisions. Their actions, through Executive Orders, 
departmental memos, and rules, upend the INA and Congressional 
intent, have eroded our immigration system, and propelled the 
crisis to current levels.
    Section 102 of the INA charges the Secretary of Homeland 
Security with administration and enforcement of the act and 
further vests in the Secretary the power and duty to control 
and guard the boundaries and borders of the United States 
against the illegal entry of aliens. The massive number of 
encounters recorded by CBP, the small number of alien removals 
by ICE, and the ever-increasing USCIS backlog, however, 
suggests that this Secretary has failed to faithfully execute 
the laws entrusted to him.
    The sharp rise in unlawful entries and attempts along the 
Southwest border provide a critical litmus test of the crisis's 
scope, but it's an outgrowth of the departmental actions. 
Additionally, media often focuses on the border to the 
detriment of the other actions and inaction by ICE and USCIS, 
which we must also focus on.
    Since day one of the administration, the department has 
taken aggressive action to undermine immigration enforcement. 
Nowhere is that clearer than Secretary Mayorkis' September 30, 
2021, memorandum which outlined the appropriate instances in 
which DHS was authorized to take action against aliens either 
unlawfully present or lawfully present but removable.
    Secretary Mayorkis outlined three main buckets for removal: 
Threats to national security, threats to public safety, and 
threats to border security. While in theory this would seem to 
encompass many aliens, in reality, the numerous carve-outs, 
loose definitions, and required factors for consideration made 
it nearly impossible for ICE to move forward with most 
enforcement actions. These poorly defined categories gave even 
some of the most serious of criminal aliens a free pass in the 
interest of equity.
    This and other memos sought to redefine immigration 
enforcement by creating fictional priorities with no basis in 
law. Categorical prosecutorial discretion is not discretion at 
all. The department's failure to enforce the full INA in the 
name of prioritization and discretion is a dereliction of duty.
    So, too, the department's regulatory agenda seeks to upend 
the credible fear process in the name of orderly processing. 
Starting with the presumption that every economic migrant is 
entitled to protection, in 2022, DHS issued an interim and 
final rule on credible fear screening. Under the new process, a 
positive credible fear determination by an asylum officer will 
lead to a nonadversarial asylum interview before another DHS 
asylum officer. This impermissibly changes the process and 
undermines Congressional action by shifting adjudication 
authority from DOJ to DHS.
    Even more concerning, written summary of the original 
credible fear interview doubles as an alien's asylum 
application rendering the requirement that an alien file one 
moot. This shifts the burden and also provides a path for fraud 
and renders anti-asylum fraud measures moot.
    A second final rule issued last month appears to be tough 
on illegal border crossers making them eligible for asylum. 
However, the number of exceptions and the easily rebuttable 
presumption belie its stated purpose. This rule will have the 
opposite effect as it will ultimately incentivize aliens to 
make the dangerous trek northward with families in tow.
    I would be remiss to not mention parole abuse. Regardless 
of the plain language of the statute limiting parole to case-
by-case matters, parole has become a favorite tool of this 
administration. While first used as an alternative to 
detention, parole programs have subsequently played a large 
role in artificially decreasing border numbers. The expanded 
categorical parole programs that we're seeing now are wholly 
unlawful.
    Last, vast number of pending matters presently before USCIS 
will only increase if border prioritization for adjudicators is 
not stopped. While the agency claims to want to reduce this 
number, actions speak louder than words. It was recently 
reported that USCIS adjudicators were being shifted from their 
assigned work to support operations along the Southwest border.
    The Biden Administration has taken many measures in the 
past 2.5 years aimed at addressing the border crisis. However, 
it appears that no one thought to simply enforce the law as it 
is written. Instead, the department has, through its own 
actions, created the worst border crisis in American history.
    A return to the rule of law is the only cure at this point, 
and it is incumbent on Congress to use its oversight and 
lawmaking authority to repair the damage done by the 
department.
    Thank you. I looked forward to your question.
    [The prepared statement of Mr. Edlow follows:]
    [GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
    
    Mr. McClintock. Great. Thank you for your testimony.
    Finally, Mr. Bradbury.

                  STATEMENT OF STEVE BRADBURY

    Mr. Bradbury. Thank you.
    Chair McClintock, Ranking Member Jayapal, Mr. Nadler, and 
distinguished Members of the Committee. Far from faithfully 
carrying out its enforcement duties, the Biden Administration, 
with Secretary Mayorkis at the point, is flagrantly violating 
numerous provisions of our immigration laws, laws critical to 
the safety and security of the American people.
    Here are some specific examples of the Secretary's 
violations of law. The use of parole to release tens of 
thousands of inadmissible aliens en masse into the U.S. each 
month violates INA's Section 212's express restrictions on 
parole, and it unlawfully circumvents the established 
procedures for refugee admissions under Section 207.
    Further, because of lax vetting at our ports and an 
overstretched border force, there's no way to know how many of 
the millions allowed into the U.S., let alone the huge volume 
of gotaways who have evaded our Border Patrol, fall within the 
categories of dangerous aliens prohibited entry under Section 
212.
    Secretary Mayorkis has also ignored the mandatory detention 
and removal requirements of INA Section 235, and his directions 
to ICE not to take enforcement action against most deportable 
aliens defies Section 237. Under his watch, deportations have 
fallen to historic lows, while illegal immigration is at a 
record high.
    In recent months, DHS has shifted to a new process equally 
unlawful of pre-registering aliens outside the U.S. for fast-
track entry and release using the CBP One mobile app. This CBP 
One escort service is a shell game. It's a device for funneling 
the flow of illegal immigration through our ports of entry 
instead of between them. Meanwhile, unlawful entry overall 
remains unabated.
    The claim that illegal border crossings have fallen 70 
percent is a manipulated, distorted figure. It's a comparison 
to the highest week in the history of our country for illegal 
crossings, the week before the Title 41 program ended, when 
10,000 illegals were encountered at the border. That's the 
comparison that gets to the 70-percent figure. It's false.
    In sum, the Secretary is asserting power to overturn the 
laws Congress has enacted and replace them with new immigration 
pathways, as he calls them, of his own design, entirely new 
visa-like pipelines through which is streaming into our country 
an ever-rising flood of illegal immigration. This is a vast 
usurpation of law and of Congressional power by the Executive. 
These policies cannot be justified as an exercise of 
enforcement discretion.
    Secretary Mayorkis' own actions have caused the crisis, and 
he's refused to employ the full scope of resources available to 
him, shuttering detention facilities, ending cooperation with 
border States, and abandoning the Remain in Mexico program. Not 
to be overlooked, he has also flouted his statutory duty as 
Secretary to protect the most vulnerable of migrant children 
from the scourge of human trafficking and abuse.
    Together these violations of law have produced a colossal 
humanitarian disaster and a catastrophe for America. The 
victims include a sea of vulnerable migrants caught up in the 
horrendous grip of the cartels, the exploited children who are 
enslaved and abused within our own neighborhoods, and the 
everyday Americans across our land whose communities are 
ravaged by violence and crime, strained to the breaking point 
by unforeseen economic burdens, and infested with fentanyl. 
It's a grim picture for sure but one the American people must 
see.
    We should all be grateful to you, Mr. Chair, for shining a 
bright light on these violations of law.
    Thank you.
    [The prepared statement of Mr. Bradbury follows:]
    [GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
    
    Mr. McClintock. Thank you.
    We'll now proceed to questions from the Members.
    We'll begin under the five-minute rule with Mr. Biggs.
    Mr. Biggs. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
    I have to go fast because I think there's just so much that 
Secretary Mayorkis is responsible for and culpable for.
    So, I will start with you, Mr. Bradbury. At the direction 
of Secretary Mayorkis, DHS has released and continues to 
release tens of thousands of aliens every month into the U.S. 
through mass parole and now categorical parole.
    Is this a violation of law?
    Mr. Bradbury. Yes, it violates INA Section 212(d)(5)(A).
    Mr. Biggs. Secretary Mayorkis is also mass paroling aliens 
he himself characterizes as refugees or asylum seekers without 
demonstrating that there are compelling reasons requiring that 
particular alien may be admitted by parole rather than going 
through the USRAP process for refugee admissions.
    Is that a violation of law?
    Mr. Bradbury. Yes.
    Mr. Biggs. What law?
    Mr. Bradbury. It's a violation of INA Section 212(d)(5)(B).
    Mr. Biggs. Because he's not conducting adequate 
individualized vetting of the huge volume of mass-released 
aliens, there's simply no way of knowing how many of the 
millions of aliens Mayorkis has released into the U.S. fall 
into these categories of dangerous aliens.
    Is that a violation of law?
    Mr. Bradbury. Yes, of Section 212(a).
    Mr. Biggs. Secretary Mayorkis has instituted, as you've 
talked about and all of you have mentioned as the CBP One, 
preregistration, trying to funnel these illegal migrants to the 
U.S. ports of entry along our southern border.
    Is that a violation of law?
    Mr. Bradbury. Yes, of 212, of 235, and I would say of 207.
    Mr. Biggs. All right. So, what's happened here, of course, 
is that just in this past week the U.S. Court of Appeals for 
the Eleventh Circuit halted two DHS efforts to release massive 
members of illegal migrants into the U.S. on parole.
    So, this is what one of the judges said, this opinion right 
here, that what--his violations of the law. Secretary Mayorkis' 
violations of the law are, quote, akin to posting a flashing, 
``Come in, we're open sign'' on the southern border. The 
unprecedented surge of aliens that have started arriving at the 
Southwest border almost immediately after President Biden took 
office, that has continued unabated over the past two years, 
was a predictable consequence of these actions. Indeed former--
and I'll say ``former''--former Border Patrol Chief Raul Ortiz 
credibly testified based on his experience that, ``there have 
been increases in migration when there are no consequences and 
migrant populations believe they will be released into the 
country,'' close quote. I won't go into the additional case as 
well.
    I'm going to ask Mr. Wolf this question. We've established 
that Secretary Mayorkis has engaged in conduct that violates 
his oath of office and the law. My question for you is, do you 
believe Secretary Mayorkis is violating the law intentionally, 
willfully, or is it just some oversight on his part?
    Mr. Wolf. So, I'm going to have to guess. I think it's all 
the above. I think they know exactly what they're doing; 
``they'' being the department. This construct that they have 
put in place is not by happenstance or by chance. It's by 
design, and I think it's been very clear over the last two 
years.
    So, everything that's going on at the border and the crisis 
that we see unfolding there was completely predictable, and we 
had talked to the incoming administration about some of the 
challenges that we had in the Trump Administration and warned 
them that, if they did half of what was campaigned on during 
2020, that they would see a crisis at the border. So, 
presumably they knew that; presumably they heard that. Yet, 
they still went for it.
    Mr. Biggs. The Secretary of the new administration heard 
that, incoming Secretary. Right?
    Mr. Wolf. Numerous briefings, again, mainly with transition 
staff.
    Mr. Biggs. OK. Mr. Edlow, I wanted to ask you this 
question, and it's related to testimony we heard yesterday 
about what's going on at the border and the impact on Border 
Patrol agents and morale, et cetera.
    What are you hearing about what's going on because of the 
arrangements of this Secretary?
    Mr. Edlow. Sir, I've heard that morale is at an all-time 
low throughout Border Patrol and throughout other enforcement 
entities. I've spoken to some people who have been at the 
border recently. They've seen that exact same thing, that 
people are just very unhappy. They don't know whether they 
should be doing the job or whether they are supposed to be 
ignoring the law. A lot of it's being run by memos that are--or 
just oral guidance being passed on.
    Mr. Biggs. I'm going to ask you the same question that I 
asked, and this is with regards to Secretary Mayorkis, and that 
is, do you believe that what he's doing is intentional, 
willful, or is it just he's just an incompetent buffoon and 
can't learn his lessons?
    Mr. Edlow. I don't think he's incompetent, Congressman. 
Looking at the memos, looking at the departmental actions, the 
regulatory actions, this is all part and parcel of an 
intentional action.
    Mr. Biggs. Yes, I agree with that, and I think it's long 
past time for him to be impeached.
    I yield back.
    Mr. McClintock. The Chair recognizes the gentlelady from 
Washington State, Ms. Jayapal for five minutes.
    Ms. Jayapal. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
    Clearly, there is an agenda here, and it is about 
impeaching Secretary Mayorkis.
    I want to take a step back and just say that it is quite 
stunning to have some of the witnesses here today that have the 
audacity to come before this Subcommittee and attack the 
current Homeland Security Secretary.
    Mr. Wolf, who was Chief of Staff to Secretary Kirstjen 
Nielsen, was a key architect of the universally panned by 
majorities of Americans across the political spectrum, that 
very cruel and unlawful family separation that was perpetuated 
by the Trump Administration. Further, according to a Federal 
judge and the Government Accountability Office, Mr. Wolf served 
unlawfully as the Acting Homeland Security Secretary.
    Mr. Edlow, as Acting Director of U.S. Citizenship and 
Immigration Services, helped to run that agency into the 
ground, to the point that it almost had to furlough over 13,000 
USCIS employees. On his watch, USCIS also ignored the Supreme 
Court's decision in June 2020 stating that the Trump 
Administration's attempt to rescind DACA was unlawful, holding 
new DACA applications at processing facilities even after the 
Supreme Court mandate was formally entered.
    These are the witnesses that the majority brings to this 
Subcommittee to discuss if, quote, ``the laws are being 
faithfully executed''? Forgive my skepticism or, more bluntly, 
give me a break.
    Mr. Reichlin-Melnick, let me turn to you. I want to discuss 
mandatory detention. As discussed in your testimony, Section 
235(b)(1)(B) of the Immigration and Nationality Act states that 
if an officer determines an individual has credible fear of 
persecution, that person, quote, ``shall be detained for 
further consideration of the application for asylum.''
    That makes it sound like asylum seekers must be detained. 
Can you explain why all asylum seekers are, in fact, not 
detained?
    Mr. Reichlin-Melnick. Thank you, Congresswoman.
    I think the main reason is resource based, though there's 
both resource and legal authorities I should note. The biggest 
issue here is resources. For example, if 50,000 asylum seekers 
show up at the border in any given month and every one of them 
asks for protection, there are not 50,000 detention beds. Even 
in 2019 when detention was at its highest, there were 55,000 
detention beds, and that year 891,000 were encountered by the 
Border Patrol. If even half of those were seeking asylum, it 
would not have been physically possible to detain all of them, 
which is why, under the Trump Administration, hundreds of 
thousands of asylum seekers were released straight to court 
without going through the credible fear process.
    So, at the end of the day, it is a resource issue. I will 
also note it is a legal issue because there are always 
exceptions to mandatory detention because Congress, generally 
speaking, can't enforce the Executive to enforce the law in 
certain circumstances where that is literally impossible.
    Ms. Jayapal. Has any administration, Democratic, 
Republican, ever been able to detain every single individual as 
required by the section of the Immigration and Nationality Act?
    Mr. Reichlin-Melnick. No. In fact, when Congress first 
passed that provision in 1996, there were actually fewer than 
10,000 detention beds, and this is at a time when there were 
routinely 1.6-1.7 million Border Patrol apprehensions a year. 
So, it was not possible when Congress passed the law. It's not 
been possible anytime over the last 27 years. It's still not 
possible today.
    Ms. Jayapal. It's correct, isn't it, that even at our 
highest levels of detention under the Trump Administration, it 
was never close?
    Mr. Reichlin-Melnick. That's right. In 2019, the Trump 
Administration maxed out detention beds, about 55,000 in August 
2019. That month, there were more than 55,000 people who 
arrived. We also have to note that the average time that a 
person spent in detention was over a month, so the average 
detention bed in ICE detention only turned over about 10.7 
times a year. So, there was a max capacity that they could 
hold, even at 55,000 beds, of less than a half a million, and 
that year about 900,000 people showed up. So, that's why the 
Trump Administration, in fact, released hundreds of thousands 
of people.
    Ms. Jayapal. So, that's a lot of numbers. Let me just ask 
you bluntly. Many of my colleagues on the other side of the 
aisle like to claim the Trump Administration ended what they 
call catch and release and detained all asylum seekers or sent 
them back to Mexico.
    Let me just ask you again, is that accurate? Just a simple 
``yes'' or ``no'' answer is fine. If not, you've already given 
us some of the reasons, but is that accurate?
    Mr. Reichlin-Melnick. It's not accurate. Even in 2020, 
after Title 42 went into effect, several thousand people were 
released according to data from DHS.
    Ms. Jayapal. From your testimony, it appears there's a 
detailed chart which shows that the Trump Administration 
released over 500,000 migrants at the border during his four 
years as President. Is that correct?
    Mr. Reichlin-Melnick. That is correct. That's directly from 
the border, and additional were released--were held in ICE 
detention and then released.
    Ms. Jayapal. Thank you.
    Mr. Chair, I yield back.
    Mr. McClintock. The gentlelady's time has expired.
    Mr. Van Drew.
    Mr. Van Drew. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
    Thank you all for being here today.
    There's a very, very old saying of wisdom: You reap what 
you sow. God help us what we have reaped. It all started with 
the sanctuary cities, and they were wonderful. Everybody loved 
them. They were--not everybody, for God's sake. All these big 
city mayors and other folks thought, yes, this is a great idea 
to have sanctuary cities. Not so much anymore. We don't even 
know what to do in our big cities. From Portland, Maine, to San 
Francisco, California, the lack of leadership at having these 
sanctuary cities is now creating huge problems that even 
Democrats will recognize.
    What else? What else is it that we've reaped? Well, we've 
done catch and release all throughout our Nation. Then the 
people who are listening here who are not in this room, but are 
around literally the country, they know that around the country 
there are people being released. We're paying for 
transportation. We're paying for healthcare. We're paying for a 
great deal of things that we don't even take care of our own 
people in the United States of America well enough.
    Mr. Reichlin-Melnick, I respect you, but you said that 
immigration is part of the fabric of the United States of 
America. It is, legal immigration. I don't understand what is 
so difficult to understand about the difference of legal and 
illegal. Illegal means it's not true.
    We talk about Mr. Mayorkis, and you could spend an hour and 
a half on his case. What I remember, I remember asking him when 
he was under oath--and behind him was almost like a green 
screen, one of these screens--and I said: ``Is everything OK at 
the border? Is everything good? Do we have our borders 
intact?'' He said: ``Absolutely, Congressman.''
    You looked at the pictures, you looked at the video, and 
you saw little kids being thrown over to try to get them into 
the United States, so that these adults would also be able to 
make their way in. You saw huge lines. You saw disease. You 
heard about fentanyl coming into our country, which it has. 
What are we doing to our country, man? Seriously. Sit down and 
think about this. What are we doing to the United States of 
America?
    We used--no more, no more do we immediately expedite people 
back when you can. No more do we have Remain in Mexico. We 
misuse asylum for things it was never to be used for. Asylum 
doesn't mean, gee, I don't like where I live, and I don't make 
as much money as I would like, and it's a little bit tough 
going. I feel bad for those people. I feel bad for most of the 
world. If that's going to be our standard, then let's open 
every border everywhere in the United States of America and 
accept every human being who doesn't like their country, if you 
really want to do it if you think that's right.
    We talked about impeaching Mayorkis. Well, you know what? 
He didn't tell the truth under the oath. He committed perjury. 
That alone really truly means something. He should be 
impeached. You're supposed to tell the truth or, for God's 
sake, at least want to tell the truth, try to tell the truth.
    No more Title 42, and we didn't do a damn thing to try and 
save it, change it, or make it more applicable if it wasn't 
good the way that it was. What's happening to these children 
and babies, not only in our families, not only our children 
that are dying of fentanyl, the kids that are being brought 
across and now are beholden to the drug cartel forever, and the 
drug cartels establishing facilities, establishing a presence 
in the United States of America.
    This is all true. Nobody is making this up. The statistics 
show it. We know we have millions upon millions, upon millions. 
What is it? Five million-plus?
    Just some articles I would like for the record: ``Influx of 
migrants in Massachusetts Continues to Overwhelm State 
Resources,'' Boston.com. ``1,500 Miles from the Southern 
Border, Immigration Fight Disrupts Michigan Town.'' ``Portland 
Overwhelmed By Growing Number of Asylum Seekers'' in the 
newscentermaine.com. ``Chattanooga, TN, Overwhelmed By Migrant 
Surge from Texas.'' California decides unannounced illegal 
immigrant arrivals aren't so much fun, aren't so easy, and 
maybe it's not such a good idea to have sanctuary cities after 
all.
    Come on. Everybody, let's really look at this in the eye 
and see what we've got here. We are out of control. Yes, we 
should review our immigration laws, and we should make them 
better. Yes, we should do more work.
    I want to ask Mr. Wolf a question, and I'm going to ask it 
really quickly--
    Mr. McClintock. No.
    Mr. Van Drew. No, I'm not. Sorry.
    Mr. McClintock. The gentleman's time has expired.
    Mr. Van Drew. Man, I'm mad, and I'm tired of it. How about 
that? That's how I'm going to end.
    Thank you, Mr. Chair.
    Mr. McClintock. The Chair recognizes the Ranking Member, 
Mr. Nadler.
    Mr. Nadler. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
    I want to followup on the Ranking Member's comment earlier 
and just note, not only did Mr. Wolf serve unlawfully as Acting 
Homeland Security Secretary and as the Chief Architect of the 
Unlawful Family Separation policy which literally kidnapped 
children from their parents, he also unlawfully defied a 
Congressional subpoena in September 2020 and refused to testify 
before the House Homeland Security Committee.
    It is just shocking that my Republican colleagues who claim 
to believe so strongly in Congressional oversight would invite 
a witness who has so brazenly violated the law and so 
flagrantly violates our authority.
    Mr. Reichlin-Melnick, I want to turn to you to discuss the 
issue of parole. Use of parole has become a big topic among my 
Republican colleagues. Can you discuss the history of parole 
and its bipartisan use over the last 70-plus years, and where's 
the authority for the Executive Branch to use parole?
    Mr. Reichlin-Melnick. Parole has been part of the 
immigration law since 1952, so it has been around for decades. 
For many years, especially prior to the passage of the Refugee 
Act, parole was the primary way by which the U.S. admitted 
refugees. So, for example, from 1962-1969, more than 690,000 
people came to the United States under parole from Cuba through 
various different parole programs.
    Since then, Republican and Democratic Administrations alike 
have used parole to allow people to come to the United States 
in various categories that fit the national interest. These 
have been nearly every Presidential Administration, including 
the Bush Administration, the Obama Administration, and even 
under the Trump Administration, tens of thousands of people 
were admitted under various parole programs that were then 
extant when he took office.
    Mr. Nadler. Some have criticized the Biden Administration 
for its use of parole saying it's not being done on a case-by-
case basis.
    Would you agree with that statement? If not, why not?
    Mr. Reichlin-Melnick. I don't agree with that statement for 
the primary reason that they misunderstand what ``case by 
case'' means. A case-by-case adjudication just means taking 
every application on its own. It doesn't mean that you can only 
give it to a few people. In fact, in 1996 when Congress passed 
IRA, IRA which included the case-by-case requirement, the 
Congress actually rejected an amendment which would have made 
parole into a much more narrower program.
    I think the best example of this is to sort of look at this 
as a metaphor. If I want to create a scholarship program, and I 
say this scholarship program is open to every child whose 
parents earn less than $100,000 who can show compelling need 
for it, that is case by case because each student has to 
individually show that they have a compelling need whereas if 
it just said this program is open to every person who earns 
less than $100,000, that would be categorical. There would be 
no case by case involved.
    Mr. Nadler. So, it appears that the administration is 
merely saying that certain categories of people are eligible to 
be considered for parole. Is that correct?
    Mr. Reichlin-Melnick. That's right. I think very similarly 
the wet-foot/dry-foot parole program that ran from 1995-2017, 
under which about 40,000 Cubans came in through the border, 
that was also a similar circumstance.
    Mr. Nadler. They still undergo a case-by-case determination 
to see if parole is appropriate?
    Mr. Reichlin-Melnick. That's right. Every parole memo has 
required it to be case by case.
    Mr. Nadler. Both Republican and Democratic Administrations 
have made use of categorical parole programs in the past?
    Mr. Reichlin-Melnick. Well, I wouldn't call them 
categorical, but I would say parole programs that were open to 
certain individuals based on, for example, their nationality or 
their job.
    Mr. Nadler. Did the Trump Administration use parole?
    Mr. Reichlin-Melnick. Yes. I think the most prominent one 
is the Military Families Parole in Place program which operated 
under the Trump Administration.
    Mr. Nadler. Now, the Trump Administration continued the use 
of parole as part of the Cuban Family Reunification Parole 
program. That sounds like a categorical program that my 
colleagues on the other side of the aisle have complained 
about.
    Mr. Reichlin-Melnick. Yes. Cuba has in particular had 
multiple parole programs in use for their nationals over the 
last 20 years.
    Mr. Nadler. Is this parole program similar to other family 
reunification parole programs recently announced by the Biden 
Administration for Colombia, El Salvador, Guatemala, and 
Honduras?
    Mr. Reichlin-Melnick. My understanding, per DHS' 
announcements last week, is that the new parole programs will 
be virtually the same as the Cuban Family Reunification Parole 
program.
    Mr. Nadler. Can you explain how those programs work? Who's 
eligible? Are these still granted parole on a case-by-case 
basis as the law requires?
    Mr. Reichlin-Melnick. Yes.
    So, the family reunification parole programs are open to 
individuals from certain countries who have family members who 
have pending immigrant visa applications already. So, they have 
been approved for a visa, but they are just in a backlog.
    So there, if those individuals are invited to apply for the 
program from the National Visa Center, then they have to submit 
an application. They have to go through a vetting process. Then 
it is the exercise of discretion of the United States to 
determine whether or not to admit the person through this 
parole program.
    Mr. Nadler. Thank you. I yield back.
    Mr. McClintock. Mr. Tiffany.
    Mr. Tiffany. Mr. Reichlin-Melnick, so the expansion of 
parole is legal?
    Mr. Reichlin-Melnick. In my opinion, yes.
    Mr. Tiffany. Mr. Wolf, it says you served unlawfully. You 
want to share with us whether you served this country 
unlawfully?
    Mr. Wolf. So, I've spent seven and a half years with the 
Department of Homeland Security. I was there shortly after 9/11 
when they stood it up. I was there all four years during the 
Trump Administration. I've held eight executive positions at 
the department, including an assistant secretary position, an 
undersecretary position confirmed by the U.S. Senate, a deputy 
chief of staff position, a chief of staff position, and an 
acting secretary position.
    I've been to the border dozens and dozens and dozens of 
times. I've talked to the men and women of the Border Patrol, 
ICE agents, and USCIS personnel.
    So, my expertise in this, whether you want to call me an 
acting secretary, you want to call me a dogcatcher, my 
expertise is what it is. I was also very proudly part of an 
administration that actually secured the border, put policies 
in place to bring back the rule of law and to secure the 
border.
    Mr. Tiffany. So, we just heard that the Trump 
Administration paroled people into this country.
    Did you parole over a million people into this country 
during the Trump years?
    Mr. Wolf. No, we did not.
    Mr. Tiffany. Mr. Bradbury, I believe we have the largest 
human trafficking operation perhaps in the history of the world 
that is going on at this point.
    Do you think the American people are aware of the role of 
NGO's driving these, running the pipeline to our border?
    Mr. Bradbury. No. I think that role has been sort of 
surreptitiously concealed by the way the administration has 
handled this. They are contracting with nongovernmental 
organizations to transport illegal aliens from the border to 
every district in the country.
    Mr. Tiffany. Do you think some people that donate to some 
of these sometimes faith-based organizations, NGO's, do you 
think they're aware that their money is being used as an 
accessory for human exploitation and trafficking?
    Mr. Bradbury. I seriously doubt most people are aware. They 
should be.
    Mr. Tiffany. Yes. I urge people that contribute to faith-
based organizations, you should ask them.
    In fact, I would say to you, Mr. Chair, I think we should 
have the head of Catholic Charities come before this Committee 
and explain what they're doing down on the border to facilitate 
this illegal immigration that's going on in this country.
    Great work has been done by many of these faith-based 
organizations. I think the American people should fully 
understand what's going on there.
    Mr. Bradbury, recent Florida lawsuits against the Biden 
Administration have shed considerable light on DHS, but also 
the Office of Refugee Resettlement and what they're doing.
    Can you briefly explain how the NGO's and ORR are 
facilitating this unprecedented human trafficking, especially 
of migrant children?
    Mr. Bradbury. Well, of course, under the Trafficking Victim 
Protection Reauthorization Act there are special duties, that 
the Secretary of Homeland Security has to ensure that migrant 
children who are brought into the country not from Mexico, but 
from other countries--are placed with guardians in a way 
through HHS that ensures that they're not abused, they don't 
become the victims of sex trafficking or forced labor. 
Unfortunately, we know that this is happening.
    Mr. Tiffany. Are you familiar with the--yes, it is 
happening. Are you familiar with the--let's see here--the Third 
Presentment of the Twenty-First statewide Grand Jury in Florida 
where they talked about trafficking children?
    Mr. Bradbury. I'm not. I'm sorry.
    Mr. Tiffany. I'd like to enter this into the record, if we 
may, Mr. Chair.
    Everyone should read this about the horrific human 
trafficking that's going on that the State of Florida has 
identified.
    Mr. Tiffany. Have the court orders been followed by this 
Administration when they've been told they need to follow the 
law, Mr. Wolf?
    Mr. Wolf. In several instances they have not.
    Mr. Tiffany. So, Mr. Chair, I would just close with this. 
We heard from the other side that these are just policy 
differences that we have between the two sides.
    Tell that to Erin Rachwal from Pewaukee, Wisconsin, who was 
here a couple months ago. Remember her? Remember her son took, 
I think it was like a Percocet pill, something like that, Mr. 
Chair? Died in his dorm room.
    Tell that to Kayla Hamilton's mother. She was just here in 
the last month, wasn't she, Mr. Chair? Strangled to death, 
autistic young woman, by someone who was here illegally.
    Tell that to all the angel families out there.
    I urge everyone here--a Democrat candidate for President 
just was at the border in the last couple days in Yuma, 
Arizona, and stood with farmers and said this cannot go on.
    I urge Democrats who are of good faith across the United 
States of America to join us in supporting the Secure the 
Border Act. You can do that. It turns out there actually is a 
Presidential candidate you can follow if this issue is 
important to you to secure the border. You do have a candidate 
that will help us do it.
    Yield back.
    Mr. McClintock. The gentleman's time has expired.
    Ms. Jayapal. Mr. Chair?
    Mr. McClintock. The Ranking Member has a unanimous consent 
request.
    Ms. Jayapal. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
    I ask unanimous consent to enter into the record two 
district court decisions and a decision from the U.S. 
Government Accountability Office stating that Mr. Wolf served 
unlawfully as Acting Secretary of Homeland Security.
    Mr. McClintock. Well, you've lived down to all my 
expectations, my dear friend. Your ad hominem attacks have 
become quite common here. I will not--
    Ms. Jayapal. Mr. Chair--
    Mr. McClintock. I will not object.
    Ms. Jayapal. Mr. Chair, since you--
    Mr. McClintock. There ain't no objection.
    Ms. Jayapal. Since you did reference my behavior, I would 
like to say that was a unanimous consent request to enter into 
the record factual documents. This is not a matter of opinion. 
This is a matter of fact.
    Thank you, Mr. Chair.
    Mr. McClintock. Without objection, we will enter them into 
the record.
    Mr. McClintock. Ms. Lofgren.
    Ms. Lofgren. I think it looks to me that this hearing has 
been held to come up with some rationale for an impeachment of 
the Secretary for doing his job.
    If the Congress--it's never been the case that every single 
person who's entered the United States without inspection is 
incarcerated. It's never happened.
    If that's what the Congress wants to do, they ought to look 
in the mirror, because the estimate is it would cost $35.7 
billion to do that, and the Trump Administration requests 3.1 
billion for detention.
    So, we have the Immigration and Nationality Act, which is a 
law, but the appropriations process, that yields a bill, that's 
also the law. So, it is impossible to accomplish something, 
Congress needs to address that itself.
    Getting back to the issue of parole, which I think is very 
interesting, that's been a part of the law for a very long 
time. I was thinking about its use, and sometimes its use 
depends on what's happening in the world.
    I remember when Saigon fell, hundreds of thousands of 
Vietnamese fled communism. They had been our allies in the war. 
The bulk of them were admitted using parole authority. It was 
case by case, but it was a class of people who were escaping 
from communism.
    Is that correct, Mr. Melnick?
    Mr. Reichlin-Melnick. That's right. I believe the ultimate 
total is about 360,000 Indochinese came following the fall of 
Vietnam.
    Ms. Lofgren. Thinking back on other uses--and again, it's 
categories, that you look at each case within a broad category. 
We have tended, and I think appropriately so, to want to 
protect people who are fleeing from communism.
    If you take a look at the Cuban Family Reunification Parole 
Program, those were people who had applications made for family 
members who were suffering under the yoke of communism. One by 
one, there was a determination on whether they should be given 
advanced parole to escape from that communist regime and join 
mainly American spouses.
    Is that correct, Mr. Melnick?
    Mr. Reichlin-Melnick. That's right. Parole has often been 
in fact a response to Cuba, because of course with Cuba, they 
do not accept deportations. So, we have had very little option 
for when Cubans arrived at our borders but to parole them in. 
We have created multiple parole programs under the Clinton 
Administration, the Bush Administration, and prior 
administrations for Cubans in particular.
    Ms. Lofgren. We have individuals even today, we have 
totalitarian regimes in Central America, including communist 
regimes in El Salvador and in Venezuela, and people are fleeing 
from communist oppression.
    Now, not every person who's leaving that's the reason. So, 
it has to be case by case. You would agree with me that what's 
going on in Venezuela is a communist-like totalitarian regime, 
is it not?
    Mr. Reichlin-Melnick. Venezuela and Nicaragua both, which I 
believe is what you were referring to, are both countries as 
well that do not accept, generally speaking, the returns of 
their nationals. One in four people have left Venezuela in the 
last decade.
    Ms. Lofgren. So, if we were looking at it on a case-by-case 
basis of people who were fleeing those regimes, it would really 
be in keeping with the proud tradition of this country of 
helping people who are fleeing from communist oppression. 
Wouldn't that be correct?
    Mr. Reichlin-Melnick. I believe so, yes.
    Ms. Lofgren. I just wanted to mention one other thing.
    There was parole in place for certain military families. As 
I recall, that was really stimulated by an American soldier who 
was killed in Afghanistan, and then his mother was going to be 
deported along with his wife. People, especially in the 
veteran's community, became outraged at that, the mother of 
this soldier who died for our country would be removed, 
wouldn't even be able to visit the grave of her son.
    I think every recent administration, including the Trump 
Administration, has utilized the parole authority to take a 
look at the family members of American soldiers.
    So, isn't that case, that this has been the modern 
tradition?
    Mr. Reichlin-Melnick. That's right. Since 2010, the 
military family Parole in Place program has been in effect. 
Twenty thousand people under the Trump Administration were 
paroled in under that program--or, sorry, were granted parole 
in place under that program. Crucially, in 2020, in the 
National Defense Authorization Act, Congress said it was the 
sense of Congress that this program was valid and lawful.
    Ms. Lofgren. My time is up. I yield back.
    Mr. McClintock. The gentlelady's time has expired.
    Without objection, the Chair would ask unanimous consent to 
include in the record the Homeland Security letter, August 17, 
2020, refuting claims that Acting Secretary Wolf was acting or 
was appointed unlawfully, and providing the legal justification 
for his appointment. Without objection.
    Mr. McClintock. The Chair now recognizes Mr. Roy for five 
minutes.
    Mr. Roy. I thank the Chair.
    Mr. Reichlin-Melnick, let me ask you a question.
    Is Joe Manchin, the Senator from West Virginia, is he is 
racist?
    Mr. Reichlin-Melnick. I can't comment on that.
    Mr. Roy. OK. What about Mark Kelly from Arizona?
    Mr. Reichlin-Melnick. Similarly, cannot comment on that.
    Mr. Roy. Maggie Hassan, Senator from New Hampshire?
    Mr. Reichlin-Melnick. Also, cannot comment.
    Mr. Roy. OK. Can't comment on their being a racist or not.
    How about Senator Raphael Warnock from Georgia.
    Mr. Reichlin-Melnick. Similarly, I'm not familiar.
    Mr. Roy. OK. How about Catherine Cortez Masto from Nevada?
    Mr. Reichlin-Melnick. Likewise, Mr. Roy.
    Mr. Roy. OK. Can't comment on whether they're racist or 
not?
    Mr. Reichlin-Melnick. I don't have an opinion as to the 
matter.
    Mr. Roy. OK. Because you called me a racist, and you called 
me a racist because I said that Title 42 should be enforced--
something, by the way, that this administration did to the tune 
of over a million people.
    Mr. Reichlin-Melnick. I believe it's about 2.5 million 
people actually.
    Mr. Roy. Right. So, this administration is racist?
    Mr. Reichlin-Melnick. I believe this administration has 
made a number of failures on the racial justice front.
    Mr. Roy. So, the Biden Administration is racist?
    Mr. Reichlin-Melnick. I can't comment as to the 
administration in general.
    Mr. Roy. Interesting. Good to know. Good to know the Biden 
Administration is racist and get that on the record.
    The fact is, people who want to enforce Title 42 believe 
that there was a reason that Title 42 was put in place, but 
they also recognize that Title 42 is, in fact, a band-aid on a 
very broken system where the laws were not being enforced 
otherwise. To throw around words like racist--let me ask you a 
question.
    Is my friend Henry Cuellar, is he a racist?
    Mr. Reichlin-Melnick. I can't comment on that.
    Mr. Roy. Right, because Henry Cuellar said the border 
community is very concerned about Title 42 being lifted. This 
message of lifting Title 42 is going straight to criminal 
organizations.
    He stood up and said that Title 42 should be enforced. The 
administration stood up. The Senators I just listed said that 
Title 42 should have stayed in place.
    Now, my personal view is that Title 42 wasn't the thing 
that needed to stay in place, that what ought to be in place is 
an actual border security that secures the border.
    Mr. Wolf, in your position at the head of the Department of 
Homeland Security, notwithstanding what my colleagues want to 
throw around with the ad hominem attacks, you were, in fact, 
charged with securing the homeland, right, that was actually 
your task securing the homeland at the Department of Homeland 
Security?
    Mr. Wolf. Yes. That's correct.
    Mr. Roy. Right. Did you do that?
    Mr. Wolf. Yes.
    Mr. Roy. Right. Is the current administration securing the 
homeland?
    Mr. Wolf. No.
    Mr. Roy. No. In any measure, in any way, shape, or form, is 
the current Secretary of Homeland Security carrying out his 
duty faithfully under the Constitution to secure the homeland 
of the United States?
    Mr. Wolf. He is not. As I've outlined in my written 
testimony and oral testimony, there's numerous instances where 
he is not faithfully executing the law as written.
    Mr. Roy. I thank you, Secretary Wolf.
    What I would say is, if you go back to April 2022, in a 
Judiciary Committee hearing, I read word for word the statutory 
definition of operational control under the Secure Fence Act. I 
read it sitting right over here. There was a chart.
    I put up the chart, I put up the text, and the text says,

        ``Operational control'' means the prevention of all unlawful 
        entries into the United States, including entries by 
        terrorists, other unlawful aliens, instruments of terrorism, 
        narcotics, and other contraband.

I asked Secretary Mayorkas, ``Do you have operational 
control?'' His response was,

        I do. And, Congressman, I think the Secretary of Homeland 
        Security would have said the same thing in 2020 and 2019.

In March 2023, however, at a Senate hearing, Secretary Mayorkas 
said,

        With respect to the definition of operational control, I do not 
        use the definition that appears in the Secure Fence Act, and 
        the Secure Fence Act provides statutorily that operational 
        control is defined as preventing all unlawful entries to the 
        United States. By that definition, no administration has ever 
        had operational control.

    Just two weeks prior, United States Border Patrol Chief 
Raul Ortiz answered, ``No, sir,'' when asked by Homeland 
Security Chair Mark Green, ``Does DHS have operational control 
of the entire southwest border?''
    So, the United States Border Patrol Chief Raul Ortiz says 
we do not have operational control of the border. He answered 
straight up truthfully, ``No, sir.''
    Why was it that the Secretary of Homeland Security, when I 
asked him that question, he said, ``Yes, we have operational 
control''? He said, ``I do,'' to be more precise. Then in the 
Senate he comes back and says,

        Oh, but no, I'm sorry, if you use that definition, you know the 
        one in the statute, no, no one has ever had operational 
        control.

    What is your response to that, and how would you 
characterize having operational control of the border, as you 
would say in the previous administration, compared to current?
    Mr. Wolf. Well, I would certainly talk about my time in the 
Trump Administration. If I were to get asked that question, 
whether we had operational control, the answer was, no, we did 
not. Neither was the border secure. I think words matter here. 
Those are very definitive statements.
    I always talked about how we were making the border more 
secure, or it was the most secure in our lifetime. To say that 
you have complete operational control, to say that the border 
is closed, to say that it is secure, you're hiding the ball 
from the American people. You're not being transparent. It's 
for a purpose, I think you can only guess a political purpose.
    It also defies what the men and women of the Border Patrol 
and others are doing down there. When they see their political 
leadership make these sorts of statements, it's so bad it's 
hard to find words. They don't know what to think. Because they 
are on the line. They are on that border every single day, 
watching the hundreds of thousands of individuals walk past 
them that they have to process. They see that someone is saying 
that this border is secure. Or you see the 200 known or 
suspected terrorists that have come across this border in the 
last two years, that somehow that border is closed, it's 
secure, I don't understand it.
    Mr. Roy. Yes. Kind of like accusing people of whipping 
migrants at the border.
    I yield back.
    Mr. McClintock. I'm sorry. Your time's up.
    Mr. Correa.
    Mr. Correa. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
    Mr. Melnick, is the Secretary doing his job, Mr. Mayorkas?
    Before you answer that, let me just say that General Kelly, 
former Secretary of Homeland Security, heard him say a couple 
of times that border security does not end or begin at the 
border. Today, as you look at the world, it's pretty safe to 
say, post-COVID, economies around the world are devastated. The 
only real game in town is the United States. Our economy, world 
record low unemployment rate, shortage of workers. Even China, 
I must say, is struggling to get back on their feet 
economically.
    We have a worldwide refugee crisis.
    [Chart.]
    Mr. Correa. If you look at this chart behind me from the 
U.N. Refugee Agency, it shows the number of displaced people 
just in the Americas alone. You can see countries across the 
region struggling.
    It's not a U.S. problem, it's a regional problem. Mexico is 
dealing with this problem. Canada is dealing with this problem. 
Guatemala is feeling the effects and, of course, Europe.
    Further South, Colombia. If you look at this chart, 
Colombia is really struggling.
    I must say, refugees are braving that trip North, perilous 
situation.
    I want to show you the picture of a little girl struggling 
to continue North through the Darien Gap. This little girl lost 
her mother, and another refugee going North is trying to help 
her survive.
    If refugees are willing to do this, you can imagine the 
challenges at home.
    Let me say, Title 42, we all talk about Title 42, I have to 
remind folks here, Title 42, the party in charge in Congress 
today, House of Representatives, voted to end the COVID-19 
pandemic, and by operation of law they lifted Title 42.
    Let me repeat. Party in charge voted to lift Title 42. Let 
me say, I agree with them. Title 42 should not be an 
immigration tool, but a health issue.
    The administration has taken steps to prepare for Title 
42's lifting. I was at the border numerous times before Title 
42 was lifted. I would ask those officers in green and blue, 
``Are you ready?'' They would tell me, ``We're as ready as can 
be.''
    It wasn't just CBP. It was DHS, State Department, and the 
administration who did a pretty good job in anticipation of the 
lifting of Title 42.
    In fact, if you look at the next chart, these are the 
numbers reported publicly by Border Patrol Chief Raul Ortiz: 
Fifty percent drop, 50 percent drop in the encounters after 42 
was lifted. Unexpected.
    It's not over, folks. The world is still suffering from 
major economic challenges, and these numbers may be temporary.
    The fact of the matter is, we've got to focus on getting 
economies around the world back on their feet, and we also have 
to focus on the other issue, which is immigration reform.
    Whether you like it or not, America is a massive draw, a 
big draw for workers from around the world. Fifty percent of 
our farm workers are undocumented. Every time one of those 
undocumented goes to a farm, to a ranch, they find a job.
    We are also part of the problem, meaning we must pass 
immigration reform. Otherwise, we'll continue to be in the same 
situation.
    Mr. Melnick, I asked you earlier, is the Secretary doing 
the job? We hear about operational control of the border. Was 
does that mean?
    Mr. Reichlin-Melnick. There's a colloquial definition of 
operational control, which I think is--and then there's a legal 
statutory definition under the Secure Fence Act of 2006. As Mr. 
Wolf just noted, it's not anything that any administration has 
ever reached. In fact, the way Congress wrote the statute, it 
is physically impossible for any administration to ever get 
operational control.
    Mr. Correa. So, when we ask is there operational control at 
the border, the answer is there never has been operational 
control at the border.
    Mr. Reichlin-Melnick. Statutorily, no. There are obviously 
opinions that some people may have as to their own views from a 
colloquial sense. Under the statutory definition, no, no 
administration has ever had it and none ever will.
    Mr. Correa. A political conclusion based on the times?
    Mr. Reichlin-Melnick. Again, the reality is the job of DHS 
Secretary is extraordinarily complicated and difficult, 
especially today with more people arriving from countries 
further away, as you noted with Colombia and other migrants 
coming.
    Under the Trump Administration, three out of every four 
migrants arriving came from four countries, Mexico, Guatemala, 
Honduras, and El Salvador. Today, in Fiscal Year 2023, less 
than half came from those countries. That is a hugely challenge 
for any Presidential administration, regardless of party.
    Mr. Correa. Thank you, Mr. Chair. I yield.
    Mr. McClintock. Mr. Moore.
    Mr. Moore. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
    I appreciate the witnesses being here today.
    I've said it before, and I'll say it again: A controlled 
border is a compassionate border. We had Sheriff Daniels 
actually testify here in this Committee, and he said in four 
decades, Mr. Wolf, that he had never seen the border as secure 
as it was in 2018 and never as broken as it is now.
    So, tell me, in just a few months, 24-25 months, what 
changed dramatically, and what do you think the reason we're 
having such an influx of encounters and others cross the 
border?
    Mr. Wolf. Well, I think easy answer, Congressman, is 
everything. Everything changed. It started really from day one 
of this administration where they had a very successful border 
security regime in place that we had perfected over four years. 
We didn't get everything right the first time. Over four years, 
we put a regime in place that held individuals accountable for 
illegally breaking the law, that got those who needed those 
asylum protections under U.S. law, we got them those 
protections quicker than they have ever gotten before.
    This administration, for a variety of different reasons, 
said, ``No, we don't like it.'' So, what did they do? They 
stopped border wall construction, which I should just mention, 
when you talk about operational control, that's actually in the 
Secure Fence Act.
    So, Congress back in 2006 thought that you would gain 
operational control by putting physical infrastructure along 
the border. Nevertheless.
    You would also--they tore done MPP, or the Remain in Mexico 
Program, our asylum cooperative agreements, and the list goes 
on and on and on.
    So, it doesn't take a rocket scientist to figure out what 
happens when you tear down those programs. You had the former 
Chief of the Border Patrol telling the administration at the 
time: This is what's going to happen when you tear down these 
programs and you don't put other deterrent immigration border 
security programs in place. This is what's going to happen.
    Mr. Moore. So, they gave them a heads-up, they said this is 
what's going to happen if you undo policies in place?
    Mr. Wolf. I think numerous individuals did, yes.
    Mr. Moore. I say if you've got a water leak, you don't turn 
the pressure on to the house. It seems like in a lot of ways, 
we had some problems with immigration, and we have turned a 
tremendous amount of pressure on our border agents. Really now 
they're concierge. They're not really agents. They're there, 
but they're just processing people through, and they can't keep 
up.
    Mr. Bradbury, I've heard that people South of the border 
are paying the cartel from four to five, six thousand just 
South of the border. Syrians were 20,000. Russians were paying 
19,000, and I think Chinese nationals were paying $80,000.
    The administration, in my opinion, has basically created 
twofold for people coming across the border. That's why I say 
it's compassionate to have it controlled. Because you're either 
a drug mule, you're trafficking heroin, cocaine, or fentanyl. 
You're wearing carpet shoes. That's how you pay your passage 
into this country. Or you become an indentured servant, and you 
make installment payments.
    Have you heard that as well?
    Mr. Bradbury. Yes, from some of the experts on immigration 
in the Heritage Center, of course, border security. What I 
understand is the cartels really effectively control our border 
at this point, certainly everything up to the border.
    Mr. Moore. So, the operational control is actually--the 
cartel has operational control. It's not us.
    Mr. Bradbury. Yes, more likely that than our government. 
They are making as much or more money off human trafficking now 
than the drug trafficking.
    Mr. Moore. That's my understanding.
    So, Mr. Edlow, I've got one question for you as well, sir.
    Considering this administration, do you think they're using 
the prosecutorial discretion correctly?
    Mr. Edlow. I do not. My colleague up here talked about how 
Justice Scalia in an opinion talked about prosecutorial 
discretion and how that is something that is useful and that 
every prosecutor and every police agency has. That is true. 
However, it is done on a case-by-case basis. We're back to 
talking about case-by-case bases.
    A prosecutorial discretion done as a categorical 
prosecutorial discretion is not actual discretion. That's 
categorically saying we're not going to go after a group of 
people. That's not a case-by-case determination. When Justice 
Scalia was talking about it, he was talking about at any stage 
in the process for an individual, not for a group of people.
    Mr. Moore. Mr. Melnick, does your organization plan on 
suing the Biden Administration?
    Mr. Reichlin-Melnick. We have sued the Biden 
Administration, as we have sued every administration going back 
30 years.
    Mr. Moore. Thank you.
    With that, Mr. Chair, I yield back.
    Mr. McClintock. Ms. Escobar.
    Ms. Escobar. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
    I'd like to inform the witnesses that I am the only Member 
of Congress on this Subcommittee that actually lives on the 
border. I represent El Paso, Texas. I'm a third-generation 
border resident. My children are fourth-generation border 
residents.
    I don't live hundreds of miles from the border. I live on 
the border literally. Nobody wants an orderly immigration 
process more than those of us who have built our lives on the 
border.
    I'll tell you one way we're not going to get there. It's 
with performative hearings such as these.
    If we truly want to address our Nation's immigration 
challenge and opportunity, we would do that through reasonable 
legislation, through compromise, and through comprehensive 
immigration reform.
    I'd like to invite all my colleagues on this Subcommittee 
to look at a bipartisan immigration bill, the Dignity Act, that 
my colleague Maria Elvira Salazar and I introduced. That would 
be a first--a good way to begin talking about this.
    Instead, here we are engaging in what is my Republican 
colleagues' first step in impeaching Secretary Mayorkas, not 
because of any reason that they have laid out, but simply 
because this is Speaker McCarthy's gift to the extremists in 
his conference.
    Let's look realistically at the numbers.
    Mr. Reichlin-Melnick, thank you so much, because the 
American Immigration Council actually has produced this great 
chart. I've altered it a little bit.
    [Chart.]
    Ms. Escobar. What I'd like for the public, for the American 
public and our panelists to note is that actually numbers 
started increasing long before President Biden took office, 
long before the election even. There was only one time when 
there was a precipitous drop in immigration, in apprehension, 
and that was right when COVID-19 hits. That's when the border 
was shut down.
    The chart that the American Immigration Council put 
together shows--and, Mr. Reichlin-Melnick, I believe you got 
these numbers directly from the Department of Homeland 
Security--and it demonstrates that not any of the deterrence 
measures that were put forth by the Trump Administration 
actually deterred immigration. COVID did, but shortly after the 
border was reopened those numbers started climbing right back 
up.
    That would tell us that we should be acting together in a 
bipartisan way on reasonable solutions. Instead, again, here we 
are focused on performance.
    Mr. Chair, I'd like unanimous consent to enter into the 
record a ProPublica article about family separation.
    Mr. McClintock. Yes. Without objection.
    Ms. Escobar. I'd actually like to play the audio included 
in this article.
    Mr. McClintock. You're welcome to do with your time as you 
please.
    Ms. Escobar. OK. All right. Well, I'll play it from my 
phone.
    [Audio recording played.]
    Ms. Escobar. Mr. Wolf, do you recognize this audio?
    Mr. Wolf. I recall that audio, yes.
    Ms. Escobar. You were working at DHS at the time that this 
audio was taken. Is that correct?
    Mr. Wolf. I was at the department, yes.
    Ms. Escobar. This is audio from the horrific Trump 
Administration policy of separating children from their parents 
at the border, a policy that has caused immeasurable trauma on 
children.
    Mr. Wolf, was Ms. Nielsen, when she was the Secretary and 
implemented this horrific policy, did the Republican Party 
attempt to impeach her?
    Mr. Wolf. So, I would disagree with the premise of that 
question.
    Ms. Escobar. Is that yes or no? No?
    Mr. Wolf. It's not a policy.
    Ms. Escobar. So, I will reclaim my time.
    No, the Republican Party never tried to impeach her, nor 
did they try to impeach you, despite the fact that you were an 
architect of this policy, despite the fact that you were in 
place when the insurrectionists took over our Capitol.
    You resigned because of the illegitimacy of the acting 
secretary role that you were playing on behalf of the Trump 
Administration, yet no one tried to impeach you.
    I yield back.
    Mr. McClintock. The gentlelady's time has expired. Since 
that was an ad hominem attack, I'll give Mr. Wolf--
    Mr. Wolf. Can I respond to that?
    Mr. McClintock. Yes.
    Mr. Wolf. So, I think it's a useful conversation. So, let's 
talk about children. Let's talk about protecting children. 
Let's talk about the 360,000 children that have come across 
this border in the last two years.
    Mr. Nadler. Point of order. On whose time is he speaking?
    Mr. McClintock. She made an attack on him.
    Mr. Nadler. Point of order. On whose time is Mr. Wolf 
speaking?
    Mr. McClintock. Ms. Escobar's time.
    Mr. Nadler. Ms. Escobar yielded back her time.
    Ms. Escobar. I yielded back.
    Mr. Nadler. She yielded back her time.
    Mr. McClintock. She made an ad hominem attack on Mr. Wolf, 
and I thought it was important to give him an opportunity to 
respond.
    Mr. Nadler. She yielded back her time. He can speak on 
someone else's time.
    Mr. McClintock. I will recognize the gentleman's point well 
taken and proceed to Mr. Nehls.
    Mr. Nadler. Thank you.
    Mr. Nehls. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
    I just want everybody in this room to know, everybody, 
every Member on this panel, this Committee, to know that I'm 
the only one, I'm the only one that has arrested an illegal 
alien, that has been deported six previous times, for killing 
one of my senior citizens when I was sheriff of Fort Bend 
County, Texas. I just want everybody to know that.
    All right. I have several different things I would like to 
discuss in my five minutes.
    Mr. Melnick, I'm paraphrasing some of your testimony. You 
said that in to effectively execute our immigration laws 
Congress must provide additional resources. Is that correct?
    Mr. Reichlin-Melnick. That's right, especially when it 
comes to adjudication with a two million case backlog. We are 
not funding the immigration courts enough.
    Mr. Nehls. Today, I believe--I'll paraphrase again--I'm 
here to talk about complicated reality of enforcing immigration 
laws at the border.
    Mr. Reichlin-Melnick. That's right.
    Mr. Nehls. What's complicated about 212(f)?
    Mr. Reichlin-Melnick. Well, 212(f), in particular, is quite 
complicated because it cannot be applied to the border to turn 
away asylum seekers. The Trump Administration tried that in 
fall of 2018. That was struck down by a court in California, 
upheld by the Ninth Circuit, and the Supreme Court declined to 
overturn that decision.
    Mr. Nehls. We talk a lot about Title 42, and we talk about 
that Title 42 went away. It's my understanding--anybody on the 
panel can pipe in if you would like--Title 42 dealt with the 
COVID, the pandemic, public health emergency. Is that right?
    Mr. Reichlin-Melnick. That's right. Title 42 was a CDC 
policy invoked in March 2020 when the pandemic hit.
    Mr. Nehls. Yes. When I look at 212(f)--and I guess I'm just 
a simple man--when I look at 212(f), it's been around since, I 
guess, 1956. It's been used many, many times. Actually, 1952. 
Every President since 1981 has used it at least once. Trump 
used it. They beat up on Trump when he did his little travel 
ban, but the Supreme Court upheld that and said he can do that, 
and he did.
    It's been used by Trump. He used it in the first week of 
office. Obama used it 19 times, Bush used it six, Clinton used 
it 12, Bush before used it once, Reagan used it five times.
    When you look at what that 212(f) is, this is it. Everybody 
takes a look at it. Let me read it. Section 212(f) of the INA:

        Whenever the President finds that the entry of any aliens or of 
        any class of aliens into the United States would be detrimental 
        to the interests of the United States, he may by proclamation, 
        and for such period as he deems necessary, suspend the entry of 
        all aliens or any class of aliens as immigrants or 
        nonimmigrants, or impose on the entry of aliens any 
        restrictions that he may deem appropriate.

It was used several times, 69 times in the past several years, 
dating back to 1980.
    Mr. Wolf, how do you feel about 212(f)? Instead of 
providing all these resources and asking for more support, why 
can't we just say let's get 212(f), the Supreme Court has ruled 
that Trump used it when he had his travel ban, let's just shut 
down the border, use 212(f), until we can get some operational 
control?
    Mr. Wolf. Well, Congressman, the Trump Administration, 
particularly when we talked about the travel restrictions, used 
212(f) effectively to make sure that we got more information 
sharing than we ever got from basically every other country 
around the world.
    Look, I think the conversation that I continue to hear is 
we need more resources, and we need Congress to fix this 
crisis, and that is just not correct.
    This administration has all the authority and all the power 
that it needs to secure the border today. I know that because 
we did it during the Trump Administration.
    It wasn't perfect. I'm not saying that it was. We did it 
effectively, and it became the most secure border in our 
lifetime.
    So, they can talk about more resources. You can talk about 
how it's difficult and how it's hard and how we don't have 
enough resources. That does not mean that you exempt whole 
classes of individuals from law or you categorically parole 
individuals into the country.
    If all these individuals that they are paroling in really 
need asylum protections, why aren't they bringing them in as 
asylees or refugees? They're bringing them in as parolees.
    Mr. Nehls. Yes. I've gotten 10 seconds. Thank you, Mr. 
Wolf.
    I will say this. Donald Trump has been the best President 
in my lifetime. When he comes back in 2024, 212(f) needs to be 
used. We need to shut down our southern border until we have 
operational control and save America.
    I yield back.
    Mr. McClintock. Ms. Jackson Lee.
    Ms. Jackson-Lee. I thank the Chair.
    I have a lot of friends in this room, and some are all on 
one side and many are on the other side. I have heard some 
shocking things in here that will literally take my breath 
away, adding to the Canadian fires, literally take my breath 
away.
    Someone offered up the Catholic Charities. The Republicans 
are known to introduce legislation and try to pass legislation 
to penalize the Pope, Catholic Charities, and other nonprofits 
for simply doing what the scriptures in their faith tell them 
to do.
    In addition, the kind of self-righteous testimony that I've 
heard--and it is not ad hominem of anybody, I've said it 
generically--is unbelievable. It is simply unbelievable.
    I've been on Homeland Security since 9/11, helped create 
the Committee and the department. I could turn around and blame 
the victims who jumped out of the building. That's how 
outrageous this testimony has been.
    As it relates to Title 42, since it was lifted the number 
of unlawful crossings at the southwest border has dropped 
nearly 65 percent per the Biden Administration. The 
administration in the last two fiscal years, DHS has seized 
more fentanyl and arrested more criminals for committing crimes 
related to fentanyl and precursor chemicals than any previous 
five years combined. Fentanyl seizures are even higher in 
Fiscal Year 2023. I really don't know what you're talking 
about.
    The administration has strategically placed more than 
24,000 Border Patrol agents, officers, thousands of troops, and 
contractors, to the concern of many various positions, and over 
a thousand asylum officers along the border.
    Let me be very clear. The Chair of this Committee said, as 
it relates to the impeachment of the Secretary, it's not a 
matter of if, it's a matter of when.
    Someone tell me how we're going to, in a bipartisan way, do 
the job that the American people want us to do. We are all 
concerned.
    The misrepresentation of what Border Patrol agents are 
saying, I don't know what you all are hearing. When I go, they 
are both collegial, congenial, factual, compassionate, and 
reasonable. They love their job. They believe that a lot of 
work is being done by Congress to give them resources. Someone 
just said they need no resources.
    When there are issues that need to be addressed, we do need 
to address them in a bipartisan way, as opposed to 
condemnation.
    For every visit you've been to the border, I've probably 
doubled it. I've walked the streets and seen the despair. I've 
been in the nonprofits. Yes, I have seen the horrors of the 
Trump Administration snatching children away from their parents 
and the complete disconnect that the children got in only 
months of separation when they tried to reunite them and the 
children were looking in shock at the mother and would not even 
go to the parent. That's how dysfunctional they had become.
    I have a short time, Mr. Reichlin-Melnick. I know you have 
three names, but forgive me. Give me just a quick snippet of 
the fact that the world has changed with the amount of 
migration and people moving, i.e., Venezuela, and it is 
enormous. Just quickly, because I have another question quickly 
for you.
    Mr. Reichlin-Melnick. Yes. This is the big difference 
between the Biden Administration and the Trump Administration, 
is who is coming.
    The Trump Administration, it was mostly Mexicans and 
Central Americans. Now, we are seeing far greater flows from 
other parts of the Western Hemisphere, in particular, 
Venezuela, Cuba, and Nicaragua, which pose very different 
challenges to processing.
    Ms. Jackson-Lee. For those who say we're doing nothing, I 
know that the American Immigration Council has done some work 
on this.
    Can you discuss what you found as it relates to arrests by 
Customs and Border Protection of individuals trafficking 
fentanyl?
    Can you quickly distinguish--there is something called 
human smuggling, which is what the bulk of activity is going on 
with the cartels and the smugglers. It is different from human 
trafficking. I am a champion against human trafficking.
    Please explain the fentanyl issue that you've been able to 
determine and how smuggling and trafficking is different, and 
how it is human snuggling that is going on at the border, and 
that the administration has its hand on trafficking, yes, sir.
    Let me say Reichlin-Melnick. Thank you.
    Mr. Reichlin-Melnick. Yes, really quickly, smuggling is 
usually people pay a smuggler to smuggle themselves. 
Trafficking is people who are being trafficked involuntarily, 
against their own will.
    When it comes to fentanyl, I think there I look to what the 
law enforcement agencies say. CBP, ICE, his, the DEA, and the 
FBI all say the overwhelming majority of hard drugs, such as 
fentanyl, come into the U.S. at ports of entry, smuggled 
usually in passenger cars and most often by U.S. citizens.
    Ms. Jackson-Lee. They're catching them?
    Mr. Reichlin-Melnick. The fentanyl seizures have increased 
every year, and I believe the deployment of nonintrusive 
inspection technology increases year by year.
    Mr. McClintock. The gentlelady's time has expired.
    Mr. Hunt.
    Ms. Jackson-Lee. Thank you. I yield back, Mr. Chair.
    Mr. Hunt. We are a Nation of laws, or we are not a Nation 
at all. We already have laws on the books that can prevent the 
catastrophic border crisis that we are seeing every single day 
today.
    We know they work. Do you know how we know they work? 
Because they worked under President Trump. They worked because 
he and his administration--and you, Mr. Wolf--chose to enforce 
those laws.
    Now, is this merely a failure to act, or is this 
intentional?
    President Biden and Mayorkas act as if their hands are 
tied, like nothing can be done to fix this border crisis. 
Interestingly enough, almost every policy this administration 
has attempted to implement has been roughly a failure. Biden's 
Afghan withdrawal, Biden's foreign policy, Biden's economic 
agendas, failures.
    Except for the border crisis. The border crisis is their 
only success. I say that because they have successfully created 
a chaotic situation to carry out a radical agenda. Problem. 
Reaction. Solution.
    The administration created this problem, listened to the 
reaction, and I suspect they will present a solution. That 
solution, ladies and gentlemen, in the future will be an 
attempt at mass amnesty. There, I said it.
    The real solution would have been to prevent this crisis 
from happening in the first place. The Biden Administration 
could have done just that if we'd have kept simple laws on the 
books and enforced the laws of this country. Simple as that.
    Do you know that over 200 people on the terrorist watch 
list have been arrested at the border since President Biden 
took office? That should be terrifying for you to hear. That's 
just the ones that we know of. How many have escaped into the 
interior of the United States?
    Now, I served my country in combat, and I was actually a 
West Point cadet when 9/11 happened. My classmates and I stood 
about 60 miles North, just up the Hudson River, New York City, 
and watched 3,000 innocent lives evaporate from our world in 90 
minutes. My fear is that, with our porous border, another 9/11 
is imminent, and it will happen because this administration 
won't fulfill its basic responsibility, which is to secure our 
homeland.
    The Biden Administration is making a deliberate choice to 
not secure our border. Do you know how I know this is a fact? 
Because three years ago we weren't having this conversation.
    My first question is for you, Mr. Wolf. What has changed 
between these administrations that has caused this crisis to 
explode to what we've seen lately?
    Mr. Wolf. It's the intentional destruction of a lot of 
effective policies that were put in place during the Trump 
Administration. Happy to name those one by one by one.
    We've heard a lot of talk about detention capability. What 
I will say is, yes, it's difficult, it's hard to detain 
individuals. If you actually want to remove individuals from 
this country, you need to detain them. Under the Biden 
Administration, they have removed the lowest number of 
individuals in, I would say, decades, 39,000 removals of 
criminal illegal aliens. That is a drop of over 62 percent from 
Fiscal Year 2020, which was during COVID.
    So, there's a lot of different policies that they have 
decided to tear down, very effective policies, and they did 
that without any analysis. They did it because they didn't like 
it. They didn't like the President. They didn't like whoever at 
the time. Forget about whether they were actually protecting 
Americans or they were protecting American communities.
    I think lost in this whole discussion is what is best for 
Americans on our border security policy, our immigration 
policy. It's not what is best for illegal aliens. It's what is 
best for Americans. That should be our first duty.
    Yes, we need to make sure that those that are coming here 
seeking protections, that qualify for our protections under 
law, get those protections. Absolutely. We need to think about 
Americans first, and I think that's where this administration 
is falling short.
    Mr. Hunt. Another question for you, sir. If you were 
running the Department of Homeland Security right now the same 
way that Secretary Mayorkas is doing right now, what do you 
think President Trump would have done to your job?
    Mr. Wolf. I would no longer be there.
    Mr. Hunt. I kind of tend to agree with you on that, sir.
    I want people to understand this. We've had over six 
million people, illegal aliens, enter our country since Biden's 
taken office--six million. We have conceded our border to the 
cartels. Fentanyl has killed enough Americans--enough fentanyl 
has poured into this country to kill every single American five 
times. We have sworn enemies on the terrorist watch list in the 
United States, and we don't even know where they are.
    If President Biden does not secure this border, we're going 
to have another 9/11. That's how serious this is. We must do 
our job and protect the American citizens.
    Thank you all for being here, and God bless you.
    Mr. McClintock. Thank you.
    Ms. Ross.
    Ms. Ross. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
    I just want to do a little reset here. To be very clear, 
President Biden inherited a disaster of a border from former 
President Trump. We all watched it on TV aghast. He did it in 
the middle of a global pandemic.
    Now, the Biden Administration is not perfect, and I'm not 
here to defend every single thing that they've done. What they 
have done is work to correct course, to tighten security, while 
also expanding pathways to legal immigration.
    These have been good faith attempts to enforce the law, 
which former President Trump rarely tried to do in a way that 
helped our immigration policy.
    It was the Trump Administration that allowed unaccompanied 
children to cruelly be held in detention far longer than 
allowed by the law. It was his administration that designed and 
boasted about family separation. It was his administration that 
wasted resources illegally on inefficient enforcement 
mechanisms like the construction of the border wall.
    Countless reports have demonstrated how the militarization 
of border security increases the number of unauthorized 
immigrants who remain in the United States because it disrupts 
historically circular-flowing migration and results in a net 
undocumented inflow.
    This hearing is yet another example of my Republican 
colleagues' preference for partisan political hearings over 
engaging in good faith discussions about solutions that could 
actually work. There are bipartisan proposals for this on both 
the House and Senate side, yet we've had zero hearings on 
those.
    As we've heard in the days after Title 42 ended, Border 
Patrol encounters have gone down. So, it is particularly ironic 
that we are having this hearing now. Now is the time that we 
should be working together on solutions.
    We need legislation that enhances border security. Several 
of us recently visited the border, and we got lots of great 
suggestions about how to do that from the people who deal with 
this every single day.
    We also need legislation that expands pathways to legal 
residency and citizenship and strengthens our economy.
    You might have seen me step out briefly about a half an 
hour ago to meet with the home builders from North Carolina. 
One of their priorities for their legislative agenda is 
comprehensive immigration reform. Same priority for most of the 
businesses in my district in North Carolina, same priority for 
the agricultural community, same priority for the hospitality 
industry. Yet, we haven't had one hearing on doing that.
    For two sessions of Congress, I've introduced bipartisan, 
bicameral legislation to help people who came to this country 
legally as dependents of visa holders. Because we have such a 
broken immigration system, they're being forced to self-deport 
and leave their families and the only country that they know 
because this Congress does not have the will to take that bill 
up.
    Now, to the credit of the last Congress, it passed the 
House in two different vehicles.
    We have a broken immigration system on many levels. It is 
time to get about the business of having hearings on real 
legislation that will solve real problems and help real people.
    Thank you, Mr. Chair, and I yield back.
    Mr. McClintock. Thank you.
    Mr. Wolf, when you were Acting DHS Secretary the border was 
secure, was it not, for all intents and purposes?
    Mr. Wolf. We worked every day to secure it, every day, 
every week, every month.
    Mr. McClintock. We had reached a very low number of illegal 
border crossings, had we not?
    Mr. Wolf. I think by a number of different metrics, and 
that's certainly one, the number of apprehensions fell.
    Mr. McClintock. Since then, of course, we have seen a mass 
migration of unprecedented proportions, millions and millions 
flooding into the country.
    Were there changes in law that occurred to account for 
this, or is it entirely a matter of not enforcing the law?
    Mr. Wolf. There's been no changes in law that I'm aware of.
    Mr. McClintock. Mr. Edlow, there have been a lot of 
instances now when the administration's been called out by the 
courts for failing to enforce the law. What's been the 
administration's response to these court orders?
    Mr. Edlow. Well, with the exception of the September 30 
memo, which was enjoined and vacated in June 2022, to the 
extent that the administration has been able to get around the 
court orders, they have.
    Mr. McClintock. Has anybody challenged them on that in 
court?
    Mr. Edlow. Some States have challenged them, yes.
    Mr. McClintock. Has any court come back and issued a 
criminal contempt citation for failing to--
    Mr. Edlow. Not that I'm aware.
    Mr. McClintock. Are there any pending?
    Mr. Edlow. I couldn't answer that, sir.
    Mr. McClintock. All right.
    Mr. Wolf, any thoughts on that?
    Mr. Bradbury?
    Mr. Bradbury. I don't believe there are any pending. 
Obviously, Mr. Chair, it is difficult for a court to impose 
contempt.
    Mr. McClintock. Right. What I'm trying to do is determine 
the difference between simple maladministration and deliberate 
violation of law. I think that's a very bright line that we 
need to define.
    We spoke of detention. I think Mr. Reichlin-Melnick made a 
very good point. You've have ten illegal aliens, you have beds 
to detain five, what do you do with the other five?
    Is that what's actually going on, Mr. Wolf?
    Mr. Wolf. So, not only should you be detaining, but if 
you're unable to detain, then you can certainly have them wait, 
such as what we did under MPP.
    I think that's an interesting point that was missed in this 
whole debate. We started talking about detention and how that's 
never achievable. I'm not here saying that you can detain 
everyone, but there is another option that Congress in the INA 
tells you to do. So, if you can't do that, then you can hold 
them in a third country, as we did under the Migrant Protection 
Protocols. Again, interesting that was not brought up.
    So, there are other ways that you can enforce the law. This 
idea that if you can't detain them, that simply they're 
released into American communities, is not the law, and we 
shouldn't pretend that it is. Yet, that is what is occurring, 
what's been occurring for the last several years.
    Mr. McClintock. Well, is this actually a violation of law 
or is it just a very poor decision?
    Mr. Wolf. I would say it's both.
    Mr. McClintock. Mr. Edlow, I'm told that all the capacity 
that we have right now isn't being used, and yet illegal aliens 
are being released into the country.
    Mr. Edlow. I don't believe it is being used, Congressman. 
For the most part there are more interest right now in--it was 
in paroling people, and now it's giving notices to appear at 
the border and letting people go along their way. There is not 
an interest in detaining as far as I can see.
    Mr. McClintock. Let's talk about parole authority. Congress 
did tighten the criteria for paroles back in the mid-1990's 
precisely because it was being abused in the manner that Mr. 
Reichlin-Melnick outlined.
    Is it true that 20,000 mass paroles were done under the 
Trump Administration, Mr. Wolf?
    Mr. Wolf. So, there are a number of parole programs that we 
administered, obviously, that we began--or we continued to 
administer that was going on during the Obama Administration 
and the like. Again, the important point here is, are you 
trying to secure the border, and are you trying to hold people 
accountable, and are you trying to get them the protections 
they need?
    So, as they parole people into the United States, there's 
no asylum protections for them. They're not in asylum 
proceedings. So, if they truly need asylum, why aren't they 
being put into asylum proceedings? Instead, they're simply 
paroling them into the country to, again, have this status for 
a year, perhaps even two years at a time. It doesn't make any 
sense. It's a little smoke and mirrors of what the 
administration is trying to do at the border.
    Mr. McClintock. OK. Asylum hearings are designed to be 
adversarial in nature. They're presided over by immigration 
judges bound by the law. How does that differ from the 
administration's replacement of this process with USCIS asylum 
officers?
    Mr. Bradbury?
    Mr. Bradbury. Well, it's completely different now because 
they're reviewing their own appeals of their own decisions. 
It's not an adversarial process.
    Mr. McClintock. Is there a provision of law that gives them 
this authority?
    Mr. Bradbury. No. It's in violation of Section 103 of the 
INA. It's the Attorney General and the immigration judges that 
have to hear those appeals.
    Mr. McClintock. Well, I see my time has expired.
    I see Mr. Swalwell has arrived, so I recognize him for five 
minutes.
    Mr. Swalwell. Why is this hearing happening within the same 
week that we just learned that the Department of Homeland 
Security announces the average daily unlawful border crossings 
are down sharply relative to the period before Title 42 ended? 
We're seeing record number of fentanyl being seized by Border 
Patrol--seized, not getting passed them but successes because 
our law enforcement are doing their job and showing up every 
day. We don't congratulate them. Instead, we use that as a 
political tool to try and hit the Biden Administration.
    Why is this hearing happening? It's because it's a part of 
a corrupt bargain, a dirty deal that allows Speaker McCarthy to 
stay in power. He's on an installment plan. He's got to pay an 
installment every week. He's got to give Tucker Carlson the 
January 6th sensitive police footage. He has to put Marjorie 
Taylor Greene on the Committee of Homeland Security, even 
though she said January 6th was a 1776 for our country and she 
goes and visits the terrorists of January 6th at the D.C. jail 
and dishonors the police officers. Another installment is we 
have to defund the effort to help Ukraine to satisfy the Putin 
bloc that is across the aisle.
    This is an installment that Ms. Taylor Greene openly 
admitted when she said she's voting for the crazy idea that we 
pay America's bills to lift the debt ceiling because she's 
going to get some dessert out of it. That's what she said. She 
said: ``I'm going to get some dessert out of this shit 
sandwich.''
    Those are her words. This is her dessert. We all have to 
sit here for her dessert.
    Mr. McClintock. The gentleman will suspend for a moment.
    The gentleman is warned not to use vulgarities in this 
Committee room, and the gentleman is warned to restrain from 
making attacks on the motivations of Members.
    Ms. Jayapal. Mr. Chair, point of order.
    Mr. McClintock. The gentlemen will proceed in order.
    Mr. Swalwell. Mr. Chair, I apologize for quoting your 
colleague.
    Mr. McClintock. Point of order. The gentlelady will State 
the point of order.
    Mr. Swalwell. No, no, Chair. I apologize for quoting your 
colleague. I won't quote her again if that's offensive to you.
    Mr. McClintock. You will refrain from questioning the 
motives of Members.
    Mr. Swalwell. So, we're here because that was a promise 
that my colleague told the public was made, that we get to 
impeach Mayorkis. So, this is the predicate to bring 
impeachment proceedings against the Secretary of Homeland 
Security who just announced last week that daily unlawful 
border crossings are down sharply.
    Look, Kevin McCarthy may have the title of Speaker, but 
it's clear to me, because of this hearing today, he doesn't 
have the job. The job is by the person who's getting her 
dessert here today.
    I also think, Chair, it's quite rich that the title of 
today's hearing is whether the law is being faithfully executed 
because your principal witness was declared to have been an 
unlawful Acting Secretary of Homeland Security and, on 
September 17, 2020, failed to honor his own subpoena, which 
puts him in good company because the Chair of our Committee is 
400 days in to not honoring his own subpoena. We're calling 
this hearing a question of whether the laws are being 
faithfully executed with a witness who didn't honor a subpoena 
Chaired by a Committee Chair who did not honor his subpoena, 
very rich.
    So my question, Mr. Reichlin-Melnick, is, considering that 
border crossings are down, we're trying our best with a party 
that doesn't want competence at the border--they want chaos; 
they want to declare there's open borders to try and incite 
people to come to the United States--do you see grounds at all, 
any predicate that would summarize why an impeachment of 
Secretary Mayorkis would be justified?
    Mr. Reichlin-Melnick. Congressman, I'm not an expert on 
impeachment, but what I do know is that it's been 33 years 
since we last updated our illegal immigration laws and 27 years 
since we last updated our asylum laws.
    We are operating a 20th century system, a system that in 
some cases came around before the worldwide web, and it's not a 
surprise that in, a 21st century global displacement crisis, 
the United States is struggling very hard to keep up.
    So, I think what this shows is that we need to fix and 
update our laws, give the system the resources it needs to 
work, and ensure that the DHS can actually carry out the laws 
in a way that today in many ways it struggles with.
    Mr. Swalwell. Thank you.
    I think the summary here is people want competence, they 
don't want chaos, on immigration, on the debt ceiling, on 
anything else.
    I yield back.
    Mr. McClintock. Thank you.
    I think they also would like civility.
    This concludes today's hearing. I want to thank allour 
witnesses for appearing before the Committee. I want to 
apologize on behalf of the Committee for the ad hominem attacks 
that were directed at several of our guests today.
    Without objections, all Members will have five legislative 
days to submit additional written questions for the witnesses 
or additional materials for the record. I know I will have 
quite a few.
    Without objection, the hearing is adjourned.
    [Whereupon, at 4:04 p.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]

    All materials submitted for the record by Members of the 
Subcommittee on Immigration Integrity, Security, and 
Enforcement can be found at the following links: https://
docs.house.gov/Committee/Calendar/ByEvent.aspx?EventID=116066.

                                 [all]

