
 - STOPPING DIGITAL THIEVES: THE GROWING THREAT OF RANSOMWARE

[House Hearing, 117 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]


                     STOPPING DIGITAL THIEVES: THE GROWING 
                             THREAT OF RANSOMWARE

=======================================================================

                             HYBRID HEARING

                               BEFORE THE

                      SUBCOMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND 
                              INVESTIGATIONS

                                 OF THE

                    COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE
                        HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

                    ONE HUNDRED SEVENTEENTH CONGRESS

                             FIRST SESSION

                               __________

                             JULY 20, 2021

                               __________

                           Serial No. 117-44
                           
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]                           


     Published for the use of the Committee on Energy and Commerce

                   govinfo.gov/committee/house-energy
                        energycommerce.house.gov
                        
                                __________

                                
                    U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE                    
52-136 PDF                   WASHINGTON : 2023                    
          
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------                             
                       
                    COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND COMMERCE

                     FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey
                                 Chairman
BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois              CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington
ANNA G. ESHOO, California              Ranking Member
DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado              FRED UPTON, Michigan
MIKE DOYLE, Pennsylvania             MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas
JAN SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois             STEVE SCALISE, Louisiana
G. K. BUTTERFIELD, North Carolina    ROBERT E. LATTA, Ohio
DORIS O. MATSUI, California          BRETT GUTHRIE, Kentucky
KATHY CASTOR, Florida                DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia
JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland           ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois
JERRY McNERNEY, California           H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia
PETER WELCH, Vermont                 GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida
PAUL TONKO, New York                 BILL JOHNSON, Ohio
YVETTE D. CLARKE, New York           BILLY LONG, Missouri
KURT SCHRADER, Oregon                LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana
TONY CARDENAS, California            MARKWAYNE MULLIN, Oklahoma
RAUL RUIZ, California                RICHARD HUDSON, North Carolina
SCOTT H. PETERS, California          TIM WALBERG, Michigan
DEBBIE DINGELL, Michigan             EARL L. ``BUDDY'' CARTER, Georgia
MARC A. VEASEY, Texas                JEFF DUNCAN, South Carolina
ANN M. KUSTER, New Hampshire         GARY J. PALMER, Alabama
ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois, Vice       NEAL P. DUNN, Florida
    Chair                            JOHN R. CURTIS, Utah
NANETTE DIAZ BARRAGAN, California    DEBBBIE LESKO, Arizona
A. DONALD McEACHIN, Virginia         GREG PENCE, Indiana
LISA BLUNT ROCHESTER, Delaware       DAN CRENSHAW, Texas
DARREN SOTO, Florida                 JOHN JOYCE, Pennsylvania
TOM O'HALLERAN, Arizona              KELLY ARMSTRONG, North Dakota
KATHLEEN M. RICE, New York
ANGIE CRAIG, Minnesota
KIM SCHRIER, Washington
LORI TRAHAN, Massachusetts
LIZZIE FLETCHER, Texas
                                 ------                                

                           Professional Staff

                   JEFFREY C. CARROLL, Staff Director
                TIFFANY GUARASCIO, Deputy Staff Director
                  NATE HODSON, Minority Staff Director
              Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations

                        DIANA DeGETTE, Colorado
                                  Chair
ANN M. KUSTER, New Hampshire         H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia
KATHLEEN M. RICE, New York             Ranking Member
JAN SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois             MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas
PAUL TONKO, New York                 DAVID B. McKINLEY, West Virginia
RAUL RUIZ, California                BILLY LONG, Missouri
SCOTT H. PETERS, California, Vice    NEAL P. DUNN, Florida
    Chair                            JOHN JOYCE, Pennsylvania
KIM SCHRIER, Washington              GARY J. PALMER, Alabama
LORI TRAHAN, Massachusetts           CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, Washington 
TOM O'HALLERAN, Arizona                  (ex officio)
FRANK PALLONE, Jr., New Jersey (ex 
    officio)
                             C O N T E N T S

                              ----------                              
                                                                   Page
Hon. Diana DeGette, a Representative in Congress from the State 
  of Colorado, opening statement.................................     2
    Prepared statement...........................................     4
Hon. H. Morgan Griffith, a Representative in Congress from the 
  Commonwealth of Virginia, opening statement....................     5
    Prepared statement...........................................     7
Hon. Frank Pallone, Jr., a Representative in Congress from the 
  State of New Jersey, opening statement.........................     8
    Prepared statement...........................................     9
Hon. Cathy McMorris Rodgers, a Representative in Congress from 
  the State of Washington, opening statement.....................    10
    Prepared statement...........................................    12

                               Witnesses

Kemba Walden, Assistant General Counsel, Microsoft Corporation 
  Digital Crimes Unit............................................    14
    Prepared statement...........................................    17
    Answers to submitted questions...............................   121
Robert M. Lee, Chief Executive Officer, Dragos...................    27
    Prepared statement...........................................    29
    Answers to submitted questions...............................   125
Christian Dameff, M.D., Assistant Professor of Emergency 
  Medicine, Biomedical Informatics, and Computer Science, 
  University of California San Diego.............................    34
    Prepared statement...........................................    36
    Answers to submitted questions...............................   132
Charles Carmakal, Senior Vice President and Chief Technical 
  Officer, FireEye Mandiant......................................    39
    Prepared statement...........................................    42
    Answers to submitted questions...............................   137
Philip James Reiner, Chief Executive Officer, Institute for 
  Security and Technology........................................    47
    Prepared statement...........................................    49
    Answers to submitted questions...............................   144

                           Submitted Material

Cybersecurity Strategy Report, Majority Staff, Energy and 
  Commerce Committee, December 7, 2018, submitted by Mr. Griffith    97

 
       STOPPING DIGITAL THIEVES: THE GROWING THREAT OF RANSOMWARE

                              ----------                              


                         TUESDAY, JULY 20, 2021

                  House of Representatives,
      Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations,
                          Committee on Energy and Commerce,
                                                    Washington, DC.
    The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:34 a.m.., in 
the John D. Dingell Room 2123, Rayburn House Office Building, 
and remotely via Cisco Webex online video conferencing, Hon. 
Diana DeGette (Chair of the subcommittee) presiding.
    Members present: Representatives DeGette, Kuster, Rice, 
Schakowsky, Tonko, Ruiz, Peters, Schrier, Trahan, O'Halleran, 
Pallone (ex officio), Griffith (subcommittee ranking member), 
Burgess, McKinley, Dunn, Joyce, Palmer, and Rodgers (ex 
officio).
    Also present: Representative McNerney.
    Staff present: Jeffrey C. Carroll, Staff Director; Austin 
Flack, Policy Analyst; Waverly Gordon, General Counsel; Tiffany 
Guarascio, Deputy Staff Director; Perry Hamilton, Clerk; 
Rebekah Jones, Counsel; Zach Kahan, Deputy Director, Outreach 
and Member Service; Chris Knauer, Oversight Staff Director; 
Kevin McAloon, Professional Staff Member; Will McAuliffe, 
Counsel; Jon Monger, Counsel; Kaitlyn Peel, Digital Director; 
Kylea Rogers, Staff Assistant; Andrew Souvall, Director of 
Communications, Outreach, and Member Services; Benjamin Tabor, 
Junior Professional Staff Member; Sarah Burke, Minority Deputy 
Staff Director; Marissa Gervasi, Minority Counsel, Oversight 
and Investigations; Nate Hodson, Minority Staff Director; Peter 
Kielty, Minority General Counsel; Emily King, Minority Member 
Services Director; Bijan Koohmaraie, Minority Chief Counsel; 
Clare Paoletta, Minority Policy Analyst, Health; Alan Slobodin, 
Minority Chief Investigative Counsel, Oversight and 
Investigations; Michael Taggart, Minority Policy Director.
    Ms. DeGette. The Subcommittee on Oversight and 
Investigations hearing will now come to order.
    And I must say we are all extremely glad to be back in 
person. Welcome back to our in-person Members, and welcome to 
our Members who are here remotely.
    Today our subcommittee is having a hearing called 
``Stopping Digital Thieves: The Growing Threat of Ransomware,'' 
and the hearing will examine the growing threats posed by 
ransomware to U.S. businesses and critical infrastructure, and 
we will discuss recommendations for combating those threats.
    Due to the COVID-19 public health emergency, as I said, 
members can participate either in person or remotely. And if 
members are not vaccinated--I think everybody here is, but if 
they are not, they must wear a mask and be socially distanced. 
They can remove their mask when they are recognized. And again, 
anyone else present in this committee room, including press, 
must wear a mask and be socially distanced or be vaccinated.
    For Members who are participating remotely, your 
microphones will be set on mute for the purposes of eliminating 
any background noise. Members participating remotely will need 
to unmute our microphone each time you wish to speak. Please 
note once you unmute your microphone, anything that is said in 
Webex will be heard over the loudspeakers in the committee 
room, and may--and will be on C-SPAN. So just--we have 
experienced that some in the last few weeks, so just be aware.
    Because Members are participating from different locations, 
all recognition of Members, such as for questions, will be in 
the order of subcommittee seniority.
    And as always, if at any time during the hearing I am 
unable to chair the hearing, the vice chair of the 
subcommittee, Mr. Peters, will serve as Chair until I am able 
to return.
    Documents for the record can be sent to Austin Flack at the 
email address we have provided to staff. All documents will be 
entered into the record at the conclusion of the hearing.
    And the Chair will now recognize herself for the purposes 
of making an opening statement.

 OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. DIANA DeGETTE, A REPRESENTATIVE IN 
              CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF COLORADO

    Today's hearing tackles a growing threat to our national 
security, economic security, and public safety, and that is 
ransomware. In short, a ransomware attack occurs when criminals 
break into a network, lock it down, steal data, and then extort 
everyday Americans into, often, massive ransom payments. These 
digital thieves are infiltrating our schools, hospitals, food 
suppliers, and critical infrastructure companies.
    The seriousness of the issue is hard to overstate. All you 
need to do is to look at the front page of the newspaper to see 
the problem is getting worse. Earlier this year, the whole 
country watched as a single attack on Colonial Pipeline's 
information technology system shut down the gas and fuel supply 
to the entire eastern seaboard. This attack alone caused 
massive gas lines, hoarding--and many stations ran out of fuel.
    Last year, more than 560 healthcare organizations, many of 
which were already reeling from COVID-19, found themselves 
victims of ransomware. Hospital systems had to cancel 
appointments and surgeries, reroute ambulances, and delay 
critical treatment for cancer patients.
    Our food supply was also recently in the crosshairs when, a 
few weeks ago, cyber criminals attacked the company JBS, the 
largest meat producer in the world, threatening a vital link in 
our Nation's food supply.
    And these are just the attacks that we know about. 
Companies and organizations wanting to save face and maintain 
the confidence of the public often meet the ransom demands in 
secret--always pay in hard-to-trace cryptocurrency.
    Like many--or almost always doing that.
    Like many of the issues we have examined in the last year 
and a half, like vaccine confidence and the state of our public 
health infrastructure, the ransomware challenge is not new, but 
it has been exacerbated by the COVID-19 crisis. Cyber criminals 
thrive on exploiting vulnerabilities in our networks. The 
explosion of remote work and remote school during the pandemic 
greatly expanded these vulnerabilities.
    For example, experts are projecting our K through 12 
schools will face a nearly 90 percent increase in the number of 
ransomware attacks just this year. And it is not just the 
breadth of targets that is growing. The average size of ransom 
payments has also increased, reaching an estimated $312,000 per 
organization in 2020.
    Simply put, the time to address this crisis is now. To win 
the fight, we need not just a whole-of-government approach but, 
really, a whole-of-society approach. Both the public and 
private sectors have a role to play.
    First, the public sector must continue to develop and to 
lead a well-coordinated response. This includes coordination 
across U.S. Government agencies and private industry, and 
working closely with our international partners. With President 
Biden's recent actions, we are seeing the outlines of such a 
response take place, and the administration is rightfully 
treating the issue as a national security threat.
    For example, our Nation's first Cyber Director was sworn in 
just last week, and our Federal agencies are conducting a 
series of collaborations with the private sector to address 
ransomware and other critical cyber issues. I applaud the 
efforts that the Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security 
Agency announced last week. That agency is working to ensure 
that small to medium-sized businesses across our country are--
that are victimized by ransomware attacks have the resources 
needed to minimize harm and restart operations.
    Internationally, it is imperative that countries no longer 
provide safe haven for these criminal organizations. And 
President Biden has vowed that America will take any necessary 
action to defend its people and its critical infrastructure. 
The President already addressed the international part of this 
issue head on, both at the G7 summit and in multiple one-on-one 
conversations with Russian President Vladimir Putin. And just 
yesterday, the U.S., along with our European Union and NATO 
allies, condemned China for its state-sponsored cyber 
activities, including ransomware attacks.
    While the administration's actions are promising, the 
public sector cannot defeat ransomware on its own. For example, 
following a ransomware attack, too often we hear of lax 
cybersecurity requirements or known vulnerabilities that were 
ignored. We have had a number of classified briefings where we 
heard about that. And it is critical that companies of all 
sizes address chronic underinvestment in cyber defenses. Better 
cyber hygiene, more cyber expertise, and meaningful information 
sharing will address this threat.
    And Congress also has an important role to play in this. 
Just last week, key government cyber experts indicated that 
additional executive authorities may be needed to ensure the 
private sector gets to where it needs to be.
    As a committee, we must ensure that the executive branch 
has the tools and authorities to mandate effective 
cybersecurity requirements for vulnerable industries, modernize 
our defenses, and ensure that we are postured to compete with 
those threats. There is no shortage of policy proposals being 
discussed. Those include mandatory reporting of ransomware 
attacks, prohibitions on ransom payments, and increased 
regulation of critical industries and cybersecurities.
    This morning, I want to say, we have a terrific panel of 
experts who have spent decades addressing ransomware and other 
cyber crimes, and I am really looking forward to hearing from 
all of you.
    One thing is certain: This problem is not going away. The 
problem has grown exponentially over the last decade, and we 
must respond in kind. We must do everything we can to fix our 
vulnerabilities and to protect our critical industries.
    [The prepared statement of Ms. DeGette follows:]

                Prepared Statement of Hon. Diana DeGette

    Good morning. It is good to see many of you in person, 
after being remote for so long.
    Today's oversight hearing tackles a growing threat to our 
national security, economic security, and public safety, which 
is ransomware.
    In short, a ransomware attack occurs when criminals break 
into a network, lock it down, steal data, and then extort 
everyday Americans into often massive ransom payments.
    These digital thieves are infiltrating our schools, 
hospitals, food suppliers, and critical infrastructure 
companies.
    The seriousness of the issue is hard to overstate. All you 
need to do is look at the front page of the newspaper to see 
that the problem is getting worse.
    Earlier this year, the country watched as a single attack 
on Colonial Pipeline's information technology system shut down 
the gas and fuel supply to nearly the entire eastern seaboard.
    This attack alone caused massive gas lines, hoarding, and 
many stations ran out of fuel.
    Last year, more than 560 healthcare organizations--many of 
which were already reeling from the COVID-19 pandemic--found 
themselves victims of ransomware.
    Hospital systems had to cancel appointments and surgeries, 
reroute ambulances, and delay critical treatment for cancer 
patients.
    Our food supply was recently in the crosshairs, too. Just a 
few weeks ago, cyber criminals attacked the company JBS, the 
largest meat producer in the world, threatening a vital link in 
the nation's food supply.
    And these are just the attacks we know about.
    Companies and organizations wanting to save face and 
maintain the confidence of the public often meet the ransom 
demands in secret, almost always paying in hard-to-trace 
cryptocurrency.
    Like many of the issues we have examined in the last year 
and a half-such as vaccine confidence and the state of our 
public health infrastructure-the ransomware challenge is not 
new, but it has been exacerbated by the COVID-19 crisis.
    Cybercriminals thrive on exploiting vulnerabilities in our 
networks. The explosion of remote work and remote school during 
the COVID-19 pandemic greatly expanded those vulnerabilities.
    For example, experts are projecting our K 0912 schools will 
face a nearly 90 percent increase in the number of ransomware 
attacks just this year.
    And it is not just the breadth of targets that is growing. 
The average size of ransom payments has also increased, 
reaching an estimated $312,000 per organization in 2020.
    Simply put, the time to address this issue is now.
    To win this fight, we need not just a whole-of-government 
approach, but a whole-ofsociety approach. Both the public and 
private sectors have important roles to play.
    First, the public sector must continue to develop and lead 
a well-coordinated response.
    This includes coordination across US government agencies 
and private industry and working closely with our international 
partners.
    With President Biden's recent actions, we are seeing the 
outlines of such a response take shape, and the Administration 
is rightfully treating the issue as a national security threat.
    For example, our nation's first National Cyber Director was 
sworn in just last week. And our federal agencies are 
conducting a series of collaborations with the private sector 
to address ransomware and other critical cyber issues.
    I applaud the efforts that the Cybersecurity and 
Infrastructure Security Agency (CISA) announced last week. CISA 
is working to ensure that small-to-medium sized businesses 
across our country that are victimized by ransomware attacks 
have the resources needed to minimize harm and restart 
operations.
    Internationally, it is imperative that countries no longer 
provide safe haven for these criminal organizations, and 
President Biden has vowed that America will take any necessary 
action to defend its people and its critical infrastructure.
    In fact, we have already seen the President address the 
international part of this issue head-on, both at the G7 summit 
and in multiple one-on-one discussions with Russian President 
Vladimir Putin. And, just yesterday, the United States, along 
with our European Union and NATO allies, condemned China for 
its state-sponsored cyber activities, including ransomware 
attacks.
    While the Administration's actions are promising, the 
public sector cannot defeat ransomware on its own.
    For example, following a ransomware attack, we too often 
hear of lax cybersecurity requirements or known vulnerabilities 
that were ignored.
    It is critical that private companies of all sizes address 
chronic underinvestment in cyber defenses. Better cyber 
hygiene, more cyber expertise, and meaningful information 
sharing will be necessary to address this threat.
    And Congress has an important role to play in this. In 
fact, just last week, key government cyber experts indicated 
that additional executive authorities may be needed to ensure 
the private sector gets to where it needs to be.
    As a Committee, we must ensure the executive branch has the 
tools and authorities it needs to mandate effective 
cybersecurity requirements for our vulnerable industries, 
modernize our defenses, and ensure we are postured to compete 
with these threats.
    There is no shortage of policy proposals being discussed. 
These include mandatory reporting of ransomware attacks, 
prohibitions on ransom payments, and increased regulation of 
critical industries and cryptocurrencies.
    This morning we have a terrific panel of experts who have 
spent decades addressing ransomware and other cybercrimes, and 
I look forward to hearing from our witnesses on these and other 
ideas. One thing is certain: this problem is not going away.
    The ransomware threat has grown exponentially over the last 
decade, and our response must grow in-kind. We must do 
everything we can as a nation to fix our vulnerabilities and 
protect our critical industries.
    Thank you.

    Ms. DeGette. And I want to thank all of you and recognize 
our ranking member for 5 minutes for the purposes of an opening 
statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, A REPRESENTATIVE 
         IN CONGRESS FROM THE COMMONWEALTH OF VIRGINIA

    Mr. Griffith. Thank you very much, Chair DeGette, for 
holding this hearing, and especially considering the recent 
increase in ransomware attacks across our Nation, including 
high-profile attacks such as Kaseya, Colonial Pipeline, and 
SolarWinds.
    I also want to thank the witnesses for taking your time to 
join us today.
    Cybersecurity is integral to all organizations,and should 
be treated as a priority for maintaining the health and 
security of an organization as well as any other individuals or 
entities that are affiliated with that organization. The need 
for more rigorous cybersecurity protections exists across all 
industries, including healthcare, oil, gas, water, and 
electricity. Any network with vulnerabilities can be subject to 
a cyber threat, and the frequency of cyber attacks is 
increasing exponentially.
    The reach of most recent cyber attacks demonstrates how 
serious this issue is. For example, the Colonial Pipeline, one 
of the most critical pieces of energy infrastructure, was the 
target of a ransomware attack in May. The attack halted all 
pipeline operations and caused supply disruption up and down 
the East Coast for over a week, which led to higher gas prices 
and longer lines. More recently, over the Fourth of July 
holiday, the Kaseya supply chain ransomware hack affected 
medium and small-sized businesses globally, including in my 
district. Both of these attacks appear to be Russia linked, 
which is the most recent showing of cyber threat Russia poses 
to the United States.
    Although the recent attacks appear to be linked to Russia, 
adversaries of cyber attacks originate in different foreign 
nations, varying in the size of the criminal enterprises. And 
their approaches to gaining access to systems range in their 
level of sophistication.
    However, no one industry or part of our Nation's critical 
infrastructure is immune to the threats posed by these 
malicious actors. Cyber attacks have the potential to cause 
real harm, depending on the severity and the target. In 
healthcare in particular, direct harm is almost a certainty. 
Any time information in the--in healthcare and public sector is 
compromised, it poses a risk to providers, patients, and those 
who serve and supply them.
    But it is not just data and privacy that are compromised. 
Ransomware attacks can have a significant impact on patient 
health. For example, in May a ransomware attack hit a San 
Diego-based healthcare system, Scripps Health, and the cyber 
criminals stole data on close to 150,000 patients. This forced 
Scripps Health to not be fully up and running until a month 
after the cyber attack--or cyber--ransomware attack. These 
types of incidents are detrimental to the care available to the 
community and put a major strain on the surrounding healthcare 
system and the region. As the ransomware recovery timeframes 
increase from days to months, the amount of damages skyrockets. 
In a hospital's case, that can mean the difference between life 
and death.
    The recent ransomware attacks are providing lessons about 
the importance of cybersecurity. These systems are fragile. 
Although it is impossible for a system to be completely 
resilient against any cyber attack, there is much more the 
Federal Government, cybersecurity organizations, cyber victim 
organizations, and the private sector can do to detect, 
respond, and recover from ransomware threats. This is a shared 
responsibility, and we need everyone to do their part.
    The United States has great cyber experts found in both the 
Federal Government and the private sector that supply the key 
building blocks to revamping our Nation's cybersecurity. The 
Federal Government has strong resources to prevent attacks, 
respond to attacks, and hold criminals accountable. We just 
need to see more of it, and we need to make better uses of our 
resources.
    Coupled with the Federal Government resources, we have 
private-sector firms that offer cybersecurity consulting for a 
range of organizations at different entry points in the 
cybersecurity cycles and at different levels of cybersecurity 
risk. Moreover, we have experts that focus exclusively on 
industrial control systems and operation technology 
cybersecurity. We also have nonprofit networks that design 
solutions for emerging threats, and private companies with 
specialized professionals to disrupt criminal enterprise.
    We need to ensure an open line of communication, 
coordination, and information sharing in the cyber world and 
delineate proper responsibilities for developing cybersecurity 
strategies to the appropriate entities.
    It is impossible to eliminate all cyber threats to our 
Nation. However, we need to do more to better prevent and 
detect ransomware attacks so that we can thwart the worst-case 
outcomes and scenarios, especially when it comes to critical 
infrastructure.
    I look forward to hearing from the witnesses here today, 
given their expertise and experiences in this space, and I am 
eager to learn more about what we can do to help prevent and 
detect future ransomware attacks.
    I yield back. Thank you, Madam Chair.
    [The prepared statement of Mr. Griffith follows:]

             Prepared Statement of Hon. H. Morgan Griffith

    Thank you, Chair DeGette, for holding this hearing, 
especially considering the recent increase in ransomware 
attacks across our nation, including high-profile attacks such 
as Kaseya, Colonial Pipeline, and SolarWinds. I also want to 
thank the witnesses for taking the time to join us today.
    Cybersecurity is integral to all organizations and should 
be treated as a priority for maintaining the health and 
security of an organization, as well as any other individuals 
or entities that are affiliated with that organization. The 
need for more rigorous cybersecurity protections exists across 
all industries, including health care, oil, gas, water, and 
electricity. Any network with vulnerabilities can be subject to 
a cyber threat, and the frequency of cyberattacks is increasing 
exponentially.
    The reach of the most recent cyberattacks demonstrates how 
serious this issue is. For example, the Colonial Pipeline, one 
of the most critical pieces of energy infrastructure, was the 
target of a ransomware attack in May. The attack halted all 
pipeline operations and caused supply disruption up and down 
the East Coast for over a week - which led to higher gas prices 
and longer lines. More recently, over the Fourth of July 
holiday, the Kaseya supply chain ransomware hack affected 
medium and small-sized business globally. Both of these attacks 
appear to be Russia-linked, which is the most recent showing of 
the cyber threat Russia poses to the U.S.
    Although the recent attacks appear to be linked to Russia, 
adversaries of cyber-attacks originate in different foreign 
nations, vary in the size of the criminal enterprises, and 
their approaches to gaining access to systems range in their 
level of sophistication. However, no one industry or part of 
our nation's critical infrastructure is immune to the threats 
posed by these malicious actors. Cyberattacks have the 
potential to cause real harm, depending on the severity and 
target.
    In health care in particular, direct harm is almost a 
certainty. Anytime information in the health care and public 
health sector is compromised, it poses a risk to providers, 
patients, and all those who serve and supply them. But it is 
not just data and privacy that are compromised - ransomware 
attacks can have a significant impact on patient health.
    For example, in May, a ransomware attack hit a San-Diego 
based health system, Scripps Health, and the cybercriminals 
stole data on close to 150,000 patients. This forced the 
Scripps Health system to not be fully up and running until a 
month after the ransomware attack. These types of incidents are 
detrimental to the care available to the community and put a 
major strain on the surrounding health care system in the 
region. As the ransomware recovery timeframes increase from 
days to months, the amount of damage skyrockets. In a 
hospital's case, that can mean a difference between life and 
death.
    The recent ransomware attacks are providing lessons about 
the importance of cybersecurity. These systems are fragile. 
Although it is impossible for a system to be completely 
resilient against any cyberattack, there is much more the 
federal government, cybersecurity organizations, cyber victim 
organizations, and the private sector can do to detect, 
respond, and recover from ransomware threats. This is a shared 
responsibility and we need everyone to do their part.
    The United States has great cyber experts found in both the 
federal government and the private sector that supply the key 
building blocks to revamping our nation's cybersecurity. The 
federal government has strong resources to prevent attacks, 
respond to attacks, and hold criminals accountable. We just 
need to see more of it-and we need to make better use of these 
resources.
    Coupled with the federal government resources, we have 
private sector firms that offer cybersecurity consulting for a 
range of organizations at different entry points in their 
cybersecurity cycles and at different levels of cybersecurity 
risk. Moreover, we have experts that focus exclusively on 
industrial control systems (ICS) and operations technology (OT) 
cybersecurity. We also have non-profit networks that design 
solutions for emerging threats and private companies with 
specialized professionals to disrupt criminal enterprises. We 
need to ensure an open line of communication, coordination, and 
information sharing in the cyberworld and delineate proper 
responsibilities for developing cybersecurity strategies to the 
appropriate entities.
    It is impossible to eliminate all cyber threats to our 
nation. However, we need to do more to better prevent and 
detect ransomware attacks so that we can thwart worst-case 
outcomes, especially when it comes to critical infrastructure. 
I look forward to hearing from the witnesses here today given 
their expertise and experiences in this space and am eager to 
learn more about what we can do to help prevent and detect 
future ransomware attacks. I yield back.

    Ms. DeGette. I thank the gentleman. The Chair now 
recognizes the chairman of the full committee, Mr. Pallone, for 
5 minutes.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. FRANK PALLONE, Jr., A REPRESENTATIVE 
            IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NEW JERSEY

    Mr. Pallone. Thank you. Thank you, Chairwoman DeGette.
    The Energy and Commerce Committee has a long history of 
examining cybersecurity on a bipartisan basis. Over the past 
several years, we have held hearings on strengthening 
cybersecurity in the healthcare and energy sectors. We have 
also been regularly briefed by agencies on a variety of 
critical concerns related to both previous and recent 
cybersecurity threats and attacks. While we have made progress, 
it is clear much more needs to be done to address the ongoing 
threats we see nearly every day.
    One area of particular and growing concern is ransomware, 
the topic of today's hearing. Ransomware is a malicious 
cybersecurity attack that paralyzes victim organizations. The 
attack freezes computer systems and holds data hostage until a 
ransom payment is received. Ransomware used to be considered a 
nuisance crime, impacting only an individual computer. But in 
recent years it has evolved to affect the entire networks of 
organizations and even governments, extorting entities for 
enormous sums of money.
    Increasingly, criminals deploying ransomware are not just 
freezing the data of victim organizations but are also 
pilfering sensitive business and consumer data. On top of 
locking down computer networks, they also threaten to release 
the stolen data as an additional method to leverage a ransom 
payment.
    Just in the past few months, we have seen a surge of 
ransomware attacks that at times have brought aspects of normal 
life and commerce to a standstill. The ransomware attack on the 
Colonial Pipeline disrupted oil and gas supplies on the eastern 
seaboard, causing many gas stations to run out of fuel, prices 
to skyrocket, and grounding air traffic. Other recent attacks 
have threatened local police departments, including the DC 
Metropolitan Police, and victimized schools, local governments, 
and hospitals already grappling with the COVID-19 pandemic.
    I also want to underscore that the challenges brought on by 
these attacks are particularly acute for small businesses, many 
of which lack dedicated information technology staff and the 
resources and are just trying to keep their businesses 
operating. And these victims may have no idea who to turn to if 
their data is subject to a ransomware attack. We simply can't 
leave victim organizations on their own in figuring out how to 
defend against and respond to these cyber criminals.
    So given the huge scale and scope of these threats, I am 
pleased that President Biden is taking decisive steps to tackle 
this challenge. Just last week, the administration announced a 
new website, StopRansomware.gov, that is meant to provide a 
one-stop hub of ransomware resources for individuals and 
businesses. The website outlines the simple steps small 
businesses can take to protect their networks and provides 
guidance to these organizations on how to respond to ransomware 
incidents.
    The President is also leading a whole-of-government effort 
to disrupt ransomware campaigns and go after the criminals who 
launch them. The administration's strategy announced last week 
builds on an effort launched by the White House in May that 
will make it more difficult for criminals to transfer funds 
using cryptocurrency, helping make U.S. institutions more 
resistant to hacking, and urge international cooperation.
    But the Biden administration can't address this enormous 
challenge on its own. Congress must also take action, and that 
is why this oversight hearing is so important today. I look 
forward to hearing from our witnesses who have dedicated their 
careers to cybersecurity. They are uniquely positioned to make 
recommendations on the types of policies needed to defend 
against future attacks, and I am interested in their ideas as 
we explore potential solutions that will help further protect 
our Nation's critical infrastructure networks, businesses, and 
consumers.
    So with that, I thank the chairwoman for holding this 
hearing. I yield back, Madam Chair.
    [The prepared statement of Mr. Pallone follows:]

             Prepared Statement of Hon. Frank Pallone, Jr.

    The Energy and Commerce Committee has a long history of 
examining cybersecurity on a bipartisan basis. Over the past 
several years, we have held hearings on strengthening 
cybersecurity in the health care and energy sectors. We have 
also been regularly briefed by agencies on a variety of 
critical concerns related to both previous and recent 
cybersecurity threats and attacks.
    While we have made progress, it is clear much more needs to 
be done to address the ongoing threats we see nearly every day.
    One area of particular and growing concern is ransomware, 
the topic of today's hearing. Ransomware is a malicious 
cybersecurity attack that paralyzes victim organizations. The 
attack freezes computer systems and holds data hostage until a 
ransom payment is received.
    Ransomware used to be considered a nuisance crime impacting 
only an individual computer. In recent years, however, it has 
evolved to affect the entire networks of organizations and even 
governments, extorting entities for enormous sums of money.
    Increasingly, criminals deploying ransomware are not just 
freezing the data of victim organizations but are also 
pilfering sensitive business and consumer data. On top of 
locking down computer networks, they also threaten to release 
the stolen data as an additional method to leverage a ransom 
payment.
    In just the past few months, we have seen a surge of 
ransomware attacks that at times have brought aspects of normal 
life and commerce to a standstill.
    The ransomware attack on the Colonial Pipeline disrupted 
oil and gas supplies on the eastern seaboard, causing many gas 
stations to run out of fuel, prices to skyrocket, and grounding 
air traffic.
    Other recent attacks have threatened local police 
departments, including the DC Metropolitan Police, and 
victimized schools, local governments, and hospitals already 
grappling with the COVID-19 pandemic.
    I also want to underscore that the challenges brought on by 
these attacks are particularly acute for small businesses, many 
of which lack dedicated information technology staff and 
resources and are just trying to keep their businesses 
operating. These victims may have no idea who to turn to if 
their data is subject to a ransomware attack. We simply cannot 
leave victim organizations on their own when figuring out how 
to defend against and respond to these cyber criminals.
    Given the huge scale and scope of these threats, I am 
pleased that President Biden is taking decisive steps to tackle 
this challenge. Just last week the Administration announced a 
new website, StopRansomware.gov, that is meant to provide a 
one-stop hub of ransomware resources for individuals and 
businesses. The website outlines the simple steps small 
businesses can take to protect their networks and provides 
guidance to these organizations on how to respond to ransomware 
incidents.
    The President is also leading a whole-of-government effort 
to disrupt ransomware campaigns and go after the criminals who 
launch them.
    The Administration's strategy announced last week builds on 
an effort launched by the White House in May. It will make it 
more difficult for criminals to transfer funds using 
cryptocurrency, help make U.S. institutions more resistant to 
hacking, and urge international cooperation.
    But the Administration cannot address this enormous 
challenge on its own. Congress must also take action, and 
that's why this oversight hearing is so important today. I look 
forward to hearing from our witnesses who have dedicated their 
careers to cybersecurity. They are uniquely positioned to make 
recommendations on the types of policies needed to defend 
against future attacks. I am interested in their ideas as we 
explore potential solutions that will help further protect our 
nation's critical infrastructure networks, businesses, and 
consumers.
    With that, I thank the Chair for holding this hearing and I 
yield back.

    Ms. DeGette. I thank the gentleman. The Chair now 
recognizes the ranking member of the full committee, Mrs. 
Rodgers, for 5 minutes for an opening statement.

      OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS, A 
    REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF WASHINGTON

    Mrs. Rodgers. Thank you, Madam Chair. In recent months we 
have seen a significant increase in the ransomware attacks 
coming from Russia. In May, DarkSide, a ransomware group 
operating out of Russia, attacked the Colonial Pipeline, which 
accounts for about 45 percent of the East Coast's fuel. In 
June, REvil, another ransomware group operating in Russia, 
attacked GBS USA, which temporarily knocked out plants that 
process roughly one-fifth of our Nation's meat supply. Earlier 
this month REvil executed another ransomware attack, this time 
on American IT management software company Kaseya, which 
affected hundreds of businesses across the globe.
    While Russian--while the Russian President Putin may not be 
directly connected to these attacks, he refuses to crack down 
on them. White House Press Secretary Jen Psaki recently said 
that ``responsible states do not harbor ransomware criminals.'' 
Well, Mr. President, Russia is not a responsible state, and 
greenlighting a pipeline for Putin after Russian cyber criminal 
attacks on one of the most critical pipelines in the United 
States certainly will not deter Russia.
    But this threat is not unique to Russia. We know the 
Chinese Government engages in malicious cyber behavior too. 
Just yesterday the Biden administration publicly blamed hackers 
affiliated with China's main intelligence service for a far-
reaching cyber attack on Microsoft. While this administration 
must do more, I applaud them for taking this step and publicly 
addressing the threat China poses.
    The White House also recently announced a cross-government 
task force to combat the rise in ransomware attacks. President 
Biden's nominee to lead the Cybersecurity and Infrastructure 
Security Agency, Jen Easterly, was also unanimously concerned--
confirmed, sorry. These are welcome steps.
    I caution this administration, though, and this Congress, 
from consolidating cyber at one agency. Doing so is a wrong and 
dangerous approach, because it weakens an agency's ability to 
leverage their expertise in cyber preparedness for their 
specific and unique sectors. I urge the Biden administration to 
lean on that expertise.
    Director Easterly, I urge you to rely on your colleagues at 
HHS, DOE, FCC, FTC, DOT, and others to address cyber threats in 
their sectors.
    As the committee which oversees our economy's most critical 
sectors, we know firsthand the work of many of these Federal 
agencies around cyber. This committee itself has a history of 
working on cybersecurity issues to strengthen America's 
defenses against bad actors. The committee has conducted 
significant oversight over cyber incidences dating back to 
Target, the Target hack in 2013 and 2017. We brought in the 
Equifax CEO to answer for the hack of their systems that 
resulted in the loss of 143 million Americans' personal 
information.
    In 2018, following dozens of briefings, hearings, letters, 
reports, and roundtables, the Republicans on this committee 
issued a cybersecurity strategy report that provided specific 
priorities for more effective protection against 
vulnerabilities.
    Earlier this year we sent bipartisan letters to the 
Department of Energy, the Department of Commerce, the 
Department of Health and Human Services, the Environmental 
Protection Agency, and the National Telecommunications and 
Information Administration following the SolarWinds attack.
    Cyber threats and ransomware attacks will only continue to 
grow, and it is important for this committee to continue to 
lead on cyber issues. The Colonial Pipeline attack underscored 
the committee's long work to ensure the secure, reliable 
delivery of energy. The Pipeline and LNG Facility Cybersecurity 
Preparedness Act, reintroduced by Energy Subcommittee 
Republican Leader Upton and Chairman Rush, will provide DOE 
with strong, clear coordinating authorities to respond to 
future threats. And soon, our Consumer Protection and Commerce 
Subcommittee Republican leader, Gus Bilirakis, will introduce a 
bill to ensure the FTC is focused on ransomware attacks from 
abroad and working with foreign law enforcement agencies to 
hold those cyber criminals accountable.
    Yet there is more to do. Energy and Commerce should 
continue to explore ways to identify and patch cybersecurity 
vulnerabilities before they are exploited. We should also 
encourage reporting by entities of cyber attacks to the Federal 
agencies who oversee them and consider certain liability 
protections for our critical infrastructure. This is an 
important and timely discussion.
    Thank you, Madam Chair. I look forward to hearing from our 
esteemed witnesses.
    Thank you, everyone. I yield back
    [The prepared statement of Mrs. Rodgers follows:]

           Prepared Statement of Hon. Cathy McMorris Rodgers

RISE IN ATTACKS
    In recent months, we have seen a significant increase in 
ransomware attacks coming from Russia.
     In May, DarkSide--a ransomware group operating out 
of Russia--attacked the Colonial Pipeline--which accounts for 
about 45 percent of the East Coast's fuel.
     In June, REvil [are-evil]--another ransomware 
group operating in Russian--attacked JBS USA, which temporarily 
knocked out plants that process roughly one-fifth of our 
nation's meat supply.
     Earlier this month, REvil [are-evil] executed 
another ransomware attack. This time on American IT management 
software company Kaseya [KUH-SAY-AH]--which affected hundreds 
of businesses across the globe.
    While President Putin may not be directly connected to 
these attacks, he refuses to crack down on them.
    White House Press Secretary Jen Psaki (saw-key) recently 
said that quote "responsible states do not harbor ransomware 
criminals."
    Well, Mr. President, Russia is NOT a responsible state.
    And greenlighting a pipeline for Putin after Russian cyber 
criminals attack one of our most critical pipelines certainly 
will not deter Russia.
    But this threat is not unique to Russia.
    We know the Chinese government engages in malicious cyber 
behavior too.
    Just yesterday, the Biden administration publicly blamed 
hackers affiliated with China's main intelligence service for a 
far-reaching cyberattack on Microsoft.
    While this administration must do more, I applaud them for 
taking this step and publicly addressing the threat China 
poses.
ADMIN RECENT ANNOUNCEMENTS
    The White House also recently announced a cross-government 
task force to combat the rise in ransomware attacks.
    President Biden's nominee to lead the Cybersecurity and 
Infrastructure Security Agency--Jen Easterly--was also 
unanimously confirmed.
    These are all welcomed steps, but only if done right.
    I caution this administration and this Congress from 
consolidating cyber at one agency.
    Doing so is a wrong and dangerous approach because it 
weakens an agency's ability to leverage their expertise in 
cyber preparedness for their specific and unique sectors.
    I urge the Biden Administration to lean on that expertise.
    Director Easterly, I urge you to rely on your colleagues at 
HHS, DOE, the FCC, the FTC, DOT, and others to address cyber 
threats in their sectors.
    E&C Cyber Work
    As the Committee which oversees our economy's most critical 
sectors, we know firsthand the work many of these federal 
agencies have done on cyber.
    This Committee itself has a history of working on 
cybersecurity issues to strengthen American defenses against 
bad actors.
    The Committee has conducted significant oversight over 
cyber incidents dating back to the Target hack in 2013.
    In 2017, we brought in the Equifax CEO to answer for the 
hack of their systems that resulted in the loss of 143 million 
Americans' personal information.
    In 2018, following dozens of briefings, hearings, letters, 
reports, and roundtables, the Republicans on this committee 
issued a Cybersecurity Strategy Report that provided specific 
priorities for more effective protection against 
vulnerabilities.
    Earlier this year, we sent bipartisan letters to the 
Department of Energy, the Department of Commerce, the U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services, the Environmental 
Protection Agency and the National Telecommunications and 
Information Administration following the SolarWinds attack.
    Cyberthreats and ransomware attacks will only continue to 
grow and it is important for this Committee to continue lead on 
cyber issues.
    The Colonial pipeline attack underscored the Committee's 
long work to ensure the secure, reliable delivery of energy.
    The Pipeline and LNG Facility Cybersecurity Preparedness 
Act, reintroduced by Energy Subcommittee Republican Leader 
Upton and Chairman Rush will provide DOE with strong, clear 
coordinating authorities to respond to future threats.
    And soon, our Consumer Protection and Commerce Subcommittee 
Republican Leader Gus Bilirakis will introduce a bill to ensure 
the FTC is focused on ransomware attacks from abroad and 
working with foreign law enforcement agencies to hold those 
cybercriminals accountable.
    Yet, there is more to do.
    Energy and Commerce should continue to explore ways to 
identify and patch cybersecurity vulnerabilities before they 
are exploited...
    ...and we should also encourage reporting by entities of 
cyberattacks to the federal agencies who oversee them and 
consider certain liability protections for our critical 
infrastructure.
    This is an important and timely discussion and I look 
forward to hearing from our esteemed witnesses. Thank you. I 
yield back.

    Ms. DeGette. The Chair now asks unanimous consent that the 
Members' written opening statements be made part of the record. 
And without objection, so ordered.
    I now want to introduce our witnesses for today's hearing: 
Kemba Walden, who is the assistant general counsel for 
Microsoft Corporation; Robert M. Lee, who is the chief 
executive officer of Dragos; Dr. Christian Dameff, assistant 
professor of emergency medicine, biomedical informatics and 
computer science, University of California, San Diego, medical 
director of cybersecurity, U.C. San Diego Health--we are not 
going to refer to that entire title every time we discuss it 
with you, but congratulations; Charles Carmakal, senior vice 
president and chief technology officer, FireEye-Mandiant; and 
Philip Reiner, chief executive officer, Institute for Security 
and Technology.
    I want to thank all of you for appearing today, as I have 
said.
    And I know you are aware the committee is holding an 
investigative hearing. And when doing so, we have the practice 
of taking testimony under oath. Does anyone here object to 
testifying under oath?
    Let the record reflect the witnesses have responded no.
    The Chair will then advise you that, under the rules of the 
House and the rules of the committee, you are entitled to be 
accompanied by counsel. Does anyone request to be accompanied 
by counsel today?
    Let the record reflect that the witnesses have responded 
no.
    If you would, please rise and raise your right hand, so 
that you may be sworn in.
    [Witnesses sworn.]
    Ms. DeGette. Let the record reflect that the witnesses have 
responded affirmatively.
    Please be seated, and you are now under oath and subject to 
the penalties set forth in title 18, section 1001 of the U.S. 
Code.
    The Chair will now recognize our witnesses for a 5-minute 
summary of their written statements.
    There is a timer on the screen that will count down your 
time, and it will turn red when your 5 minutes have come to an 
end.
    Let me first recognize Ms. Walden for 5 minutes.

    STATEMENTS OF KEMBA WALDEN, ASSISTANT GENERAL COUNSEL, 
MICROSOFT CORPORATION DIGITAL CRIMES UNIT; ROBERT M. LEE, CHIEF 
 EXECUTIVE OFFICER, DRAGOS; CHRISTIAN DAMEFF, M.D., ASSISTANT 
 PROFESSOR OF EMERGENCY MEDICINE, BIOMEDICAL INFORMATICS, AND 
 COMPUTER SCIENCE, UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA SAN DIEGO; CHARLES 
 CARMAKAL, SENIOR VICE PRESIDENT AND CHIEF TECHNICAL OFFICER, 
  FIREEYE MANDIANT; AND PHILIP JAMES REINER, CHIEF EXECUTIVE 
         OFFICER, INSTITUTE FOR SECURITY AND TECHNOLOGY

                   STATEMENT OF KEMBA WALDEN

    Ms. Walden. Chair DeGette, Ranking Member Griffith, and 
members of the subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to 
testify today. My name is Kemba Walden, and I lead our 
ransomware analysis and disruption program within Microsoft's 
Digital Crimes Unit. Our unit is an international program of 
technical, legal, and business experts that has been fighting 
cyber crime to protect victims since 2008.
    It is estimated that last year over 2,400 organizations 
were victims of ransomware attacks, with a financial impact of 
nearly half a billion dollars. I fear that we are only seeing 
the tip of the iceberg, as likely many attacks and 
corresponding losses go unreported. This recent proliferation 
of ransomware attacks impacts our national security, our 
economic security, our public safety, and our health.
    In my oral comments today I will focus on what ransomware 
is, how the ransomware process works. I also wanted to share 
some of the key trends Microsoft is observing.
    So what is ransomware? Well, it is malicious software that, 
once deployed in a victim's network, locks that network and the 
information in it, making it inaccessible to the victim unless 
the victim pays a ransom. You may have heard of different 
strains of ransomware, such as REvil and DarkSide, Conti, Ryuk, 
and so on. These are different types of ransomware, malicious 
software that lock a victim's network. Ransomware is installed 
after a series of criminal actions, so no single criminal gang 
is associated with any particular type of ransomware. It is 
simply the tool of choice for profit.
    Today's ransomware attacks are different than the ones we 
experienced only a few years ago, where criminals deployed 
ransomware, often on a single computer in a predictable manner, 
and then demanded ransom in exchange for a decryption key to 
unlock that computer. Today's criminal has figured out how to 
use human intelligence and research to not only lock entire 
networks for a higher profit but to commit double or, in some 
cases, triple extortion. We at Microsoft call this human-
operated ransomware, otherwise known as big-game ransomware.
    Ransomware is a profitable business, with few barriers to 
entry. It takes no specialized skill to profit from this crime. 
Here's what we are seeing in recent cyber criminal attacks. 
They customize their attacks and can be patient. Human-operated 
ransomware has evolved over the past few years, such that cyber 
criminals select specific networks to attack and then hunt for 
entry vectors. Criminal gangs are performing massive, wide-
ranging sweeps of the internet, searching for vulnerable entry 
points, such as through unpatched software or successful 
phishing. Then they wait for a time that is advantageous to 
their purpose.
    Because cyber criminals want to move laterally from one 
computer to the entire network, they focus on gaining access to 
highly privileged account credentials. They have developed a 
modular business model that we refer to as ransomware as a 
service. A manager or ransomware developer will recruit 
affiliates who have collected access, or collected credentials, 
or otherwise specialize in some other crime, offering a cut of 
the profits of an attack.
    Make no mistake, these are fully fledged criminal 
enterprises. They find opportunities to double- or even triple-
extort victims. So, before locking down a victim's system, they 
will find high-value information and steal it. Not only will 
they demand payment to unlock a victim's network, they will 
demand payment in exchange for not leaking the victim's data. 
In some cases, they will extort a victim a third time in 
exchange for not committing even more crimes, such as a DDos 
attack. They demand victims pay in cryptocurrency, thus taking 
advantage of the anonymous nature of this payment system.
    While the movement of money is transparent, the crypto 
economy values privacy of the persons and the circumstances 
behind each transaction. So when cryptocurrency is used, 
criminals can easily verify when a victim has paid the ransom 
but hide behind the opaqueness of a crypto wallet. Importantly, 
this blockchain technology does not cause cyber criminals to 
commit this crime. Rather, elements of the crypto ecosystem 
make payments a bit easier, facilitating the crime.
    In fact, while working with the Ransomware Task Force, I 
learned that compliance stakeholders within the crypto economy 
are just as eager as anyone to eliminate the nefarious use of 
their platforms.
    So what do we do about it? Well, there is something for 
everyone to do. The Ransomware Task Force Report does a great 
job laying this out, so I won't go into detail here. However, I 
want to underscore the importance of partnership and actionable 
information sharing.
    Criminals are smart, they are creative, they are well 
financed, and they are not limited by borders. The security 
community must match this. At Microsoft, our impact is greatest 
when we work collaboratively with government and others in the 
private sector.
    In conclusion, government has law enforcement and 
intelligence resources that private sector cannot match. The 
private sector has access to data and technological resources 
that governments cannot match. We must work together to find 
innovative solutions.
    Thank you, and I look forward to your questions.
    [The prepared statement of Ms. Walden follows:]
    [GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
    
    Ms. DeGette. Thank you so much.
    Now I am now pleased to recognize you, Mr. Lee, for 5 
minutes.

                   STATEMENT OF ROBERT M. LEE

    Mr. Lee. Thank you. Chairwoman DeGette, Ranking Member 
Griffith, and members of the committee, thank you for providing 
me the opportunity to testify before you today.
    I started my career as an Air Force officer and spent most 
of that time tasked at the National Security Agency, where I 
built and led a first-of-its-kind mission to hunt for and 
analyze threats targeting industrial control systems. At that 
time, cyber threats towards industrial systems were seen as a 
possibility, but not as a reality.
    The problem, though, is everyone was looking in the wrong 
location. Analysts around the community were hunting for 
threats in enterprise IT, or information technology, networks, 
such as those that people depend on for personal computer usage 
and email. What we were not doing is looking at industrial and 
operations networks themselves, such as those in power plants, 
pipelines, water utilities, and manufacturing sites. Broadly, I 
will refer to this as operations technology, or OT.
    The easiest way to explain OT is to consider that 
everything we have in IT, plus physics. When adversaries target 
IT networks, they often steal data. And when they disrupt them 
with malicious software such as ransomware, it impacts workers' 
ability to do their job. When adversaries target OT networks, 
they can, intentionally or not, create unsafe conditions that 
cause damage to the world around us, up to and including the 
loss of human life.
    As I mentioned, though, we did not see the various OT 
threats that existed, because the broader community was looking 
for OT threats in IT networks. We lacked the visibility in OT 
to determine what was happening. In essence, we had the 
equivalence of Schrodinger's OT. We did not look inside the box 
to determine if the cat was alive or not. In my time at the NSA 
we started looking inside that box. To our surprise, we found a 
wide variety of state actors targeting these systems.
    Today, at Dragos, we track 15 state actors targeting OT 
around the world, including many operations in the United 
States. Specific to the topic of ransomware, we have responded 
to numerous incidents and ransomware incidents in OT. Each 
company has done the right thing. They have sought out help. 
However, these incidents happen far more often than people 
realize. Across all the cases, though, we continue to see that 
a lack of visibility in the OT networks leads companies to 
believing that they are in a better place than they actually 
are.
    Our hearing today, appropriately, is on ransomware. But I 
want to underscore that it is just one risk facing our 
infrastructure and, if anything, highlights that, if criminals 
can be successful in breaching and disrupting our networks, 
state actors will find much more success.
    However, the threats are worse than we realize, but not as 
bad as we want to imagine. And, ultimately, defense is doable. 
Today I want to highlight a few key points.
    Number one, to defend against ransomware, we must first 
find a way to harmonize the roles and responsibilities of the 
private sector with government.
    Number two, there must be a simplified, unburdened process 
and single point of contact with the government. CISA, as an 
example, could be the front door of government, who could then 
coordinate the interagency and communicate clearly to the 
private sector. There are recommendations in the National 
Infrastructure Advisory Council and Cyberspace Solarium 
Commission to improve analyst collaboration, as well.
    Ransomware in OT, my third point, is exposing the 
underinvestment in cybersecurity in many organizations. My 
prediction is, as we look to counter the ransomware threat, we 
will start to gain more insights, and those insights will lead 
us to find more state actors and other threats. We must be 
prepared for what we find and think about the ransomware 
strategy as an overall portion of our cybersecurity strategy.
    Number four, critical infrastructure companies stand ready 
to do the right thing and partner with government fully. 
However, differing regulation regimes and requirements can 
distract from the focus. Whatever regulations and standards 
manifest, they should be thought of together so that companies 
do not have overly burdensome requirements on them as we all 
try to achieve the same goal.
    And lastly, government should communicate the why and the 
what to the private sector, but leave the how to the experts in 
those entities. We have seen this work very well.
    This administration and the Department of Energy launched a 
100-day action plan earlier this year focused on OT. They did 
that in the electric sector. The goal was increasing real-time 
information sharing, visibility, detection, and response 
capabilities in OT networks. The government laid out the 
requirements and why they wanted companies to do this, but they 
did not dictate the solution or how they had to achieve it. 
This was done in collaboration with the electric sector 
leaders, as well.
    The electric sector coordinated, evaluated what was on the 
market, and chose Neighborhood Keeper, a technology made by 
Dragos in collaboration with the Department of Energy. They 
then deployed it quickly, voluntarily, and at their own costs. 
As a result, we went from less than 5 percent of the electric 
system monitored in the United States to more than 70 percent 
of the electric system monitored in OT networks in under 100 
days. This is the exact type of visibility and success useful 
in preventing ransomware and those issues.
    Government setting requirements and amplifying them is 
important. Letting the private sector figure out innovative 
ways in how to achieve those requirements is paramount. I thank 
the committee for providing me the opportunity to testify today 
and welcome any additional questions or information.
    [The prepared statement of Mr. Lee follows:]
    [GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
    
    Ms. DeGette. Thank you so much.
    Dr. Dameff, I am now pleased to recognize you for 5 
minutes.

              STATEMENT OF CHRISTIAN DAMEFF, M.D.

    Dr. Dameff. Madam Chair DeGette, Ranking Member Griffith, 
distinguished members of the subcommittee, thank you for this 
opportunity to speak today on the effects of ransomware on 
healthcare. My name is Dr. Christian Dameff, and I am a 
practicing emergency medicine physician. I am also an assistant 
professor of emergency medicine, biomedical informatics, and 
computer science at the University of California, San Diego. I 
also serve as the medical director of cybersecurity for U.C. 
San Diego Health, the first position of its kind in the United 
States.
    Early in my adolescence, my fascination with computers and 
networks led me to the hacker community, who taught me to 
appreciate the complexity and fragility of modern computer 
systems. Today I use that knowledge to improve the 
cybersecurity of healthcare. My research focuses on the patient 
safety and care quality impacts of cyber attacks. At my core, I 
am an emergency medicine doctor. I am trained to care for any 
patient who comes through the door, whether they suffer trauma, 
heart attacks, strokes, or COVID. I am here to tell you that 
healthcare is not prepared to defend or respond against 
ransomware threats.
    Our hospitals today are increasingly dependent on 
technology. Doctors admit patients into the hospital, order and 
review laboratory tests, prescribe medications, and prepare for 
surgeries, all while using computerized workflows. We have come 
to implicitly trust and rely on these systems. And when they 
fail, healthcare grinds to a near halt.
    We know ransomware attacks affecting the healthcare sector 
are increasing in frequency, sophistication, and disruptive 
potential, in addition to the exposure of sensitive data, 
severe financial losses, and reputational damage. A cyber 
attack on a hospital has the potential to threaten life and 
limb.
    When patients suffer from strokes, heart attacks, or severe 
infections, minutes matter. The best outcome for patients with 
these time-dependent crises depend on immediate, continuous 
availability of the same digital systems that ransomware can 
disrupt. When critical medical systems go offline, our 
opportunity to save lives diminishes. The risk of error or 
misdiagnosis increases. We are now learning that cyber attacks 
impact not just the infected hospitals but the surrounding 
healthcare ecosystem at large.
    Two months ago, a ransomware attack disabled five large 
hospitals in the San Diego area for an entire month. Adjacent 
hospitals were quickly overwhelmed with unprecedented numbers 
of emergency room patients, many of whom had serious, time-
dependent illness. Wait times skyrocketed. Hospital beds 
rapidly filled. Clinicians caring for very sick patients lacked 
vital medical records from the infected hospitals. I saw 
firsthand the spillover effects and understood that the 
vulnerability of one hospital is a vulnerability of many 
hospitals.
    You have heard today from experts with technical and policy 
recommendations that, if enacted, would improve ransomware 
defenses across all sectors. However, I hope you now understand 
that healthcare has unique challenges and necessitates 
additional actions.
    First, the effects of ransomware attacks on patients' 
health should be scientifically studied. Most hospitals are not 
currently equipped to measure or report the impacts of these 
attacks. I recommend the development of standardized metrics of 
cyber attack severity on hospitals. Mandatory reporting of 
patient safety and care quality outcomes should occur for 
severe attacks. I recommend that Federal agencies such as the 
National Institutes of Health and the National Science 
Foundation prioritize funding for research on this topic.
    Second, identifying cybersecurity vulnerabilities before 
they are exploited will protect patients. There is currently 
disparity between what I call the healthcare cybersecurity 
haves and have nots. Lesser-resourced, critical-access, and 
rural hospitals need help when it comes to increasing their 
preparedness. As we seek to protect vulnerable hospitals, we 
must also avoid overly punitive measures for those who are 
unfortunate enough to fall victim to highly complex or novel 
cyber attacks, understanding that stiff fines or penalties may 
worsen an already devastating operational impact. We are only 
as strong as our least-defended communities.
    Third, I support software bill of materials as one 
mechanism to increase transparency around cybersecurity 
vulnerabilities. Software bill of materials enables 
manufacturers and healthcare delivery organizations to take 
more proactive steps to manage their cybersecurity risk.
    Furthermore, I recommend ongoing support and legal 
protections for security researchers engaging in good-faith 
security research, otherwise known as coordinated vulnerability 
disclosure. We need help from ethical hackers if we are going 
to defend against the malicious ones.
    Lastly, we must prepare hospitals for inevitable attack. 
The ability to rapidly deploy backup manual patient care 
systems is key to reducing patient harm. Such contingency 
planning takes resources and expertise.
    In conclusion, I applaud this committee's leadership on 
ransomware response and remain optimistic about improving cyber 
resilience in healthcare. Our patients deserve excellent care. 
Ransomware and other cyber attacks targeting hospitals threaten 
our ability to deliver that care as it is needed, when minutes 
matter.
    Thank you for this opportunity to testify today, and I 
welcome any questions you may have.
    [The prepared statement of Dr. Dameff follows:]
    [GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
    
    Ms. DeGette. Thank you so much.
    The Chair now recognizes Mr. Carmakal for 5 minutes.

                 STATEMENT OF CHARLES CARMAKAL

    Mr. Carmakal. Thank you. Chairman DeGette, Ranking Member 
Griffith, and members of the subcommittee, thank you for this 
opportunity to share our observations on the ransomware threat. 
My name is Charles Carmakal, and I am a senior vice president 
and CTO at Mandiant.
    Mediant is an organization that helps other organizations 
across the globe deal with incredible cybersecurity challenges. 
We have got over 1,000 security professionals within 25-plus 
countries that help organizations deal with a variety of 
threats, including those threats that are orchestrated by 
foreign governments and organized criminals.
    My colleagues here have done a pretty good job of talking 
about the ransomware overview, but I would like to provide a 
little bit more details on what the problem is like today. 
Ransomware is the number-one cybersecurity threat that we all 
face today. But what the--the problem that we are dealing with 
today is much more than just ransomware.
    We call the problem ``multifaceted extortion.'' This is how 
organizations get compromised by threat actors, and they deal 
with types of attacks where threat actors will steal data from 
organizations, disrupt business operations, will embarrass 
those organizations. They will reach out to partners of those 
organizations and extort them. They will reach out to customers 
and extort them, thus applying pressure to the victim 
organizations to pay substantial extortion demands. Extortion 
demands often will range, sometimes starting in six figures. 
But very often, for larger organizations, it could turn into 
seven figures, or even eight-figure demands.
    Unfortunately, we work with organizations that are 
compelled to pay substantial extortion demands--not because 
they want to, not because they feel like that is the best 
option--because they really have no choice.
    We work with organizations to really think about what are 
the things that they need to consider before paying extortion 
demands. I would like to share some of the observations and the 
learnings that we have acquired working with thousands of 
organizations dealing with this type of threat.
    I think there is a lot of misconceptions about why threat--
why victims pay threat actors. I think there is an assumption 
that organizations that have to pay don't have good 
cybersecurity hygiene, or they don't have good backups in 
place. And let me just dispel a few myths. A lot of times we 
find victim organizations pay threat actors because they want 
to accelerate the process of recovering their business 
operations. If you think about a situation where a municipality 
loses access to their emergency services, or a hospital can no 
longer treat patients and have to divert patients to other 
hospitals, it becomes incredibly important to get access to 
systems as quickly as possible. And so we sometimes find that 
victim organizations feel compelled to pay, because they feel 
that it is quicker to pay and to recover systems than it is by 
just using their backup infrastructure.
    We also find that backup infrastructure generally isn't 
resilient enough to restore every single computer that was 
impacted over a short period of time during a ransomware and a 
multifaceted extortion operation.
    The second thing that organizations need to think about 
before paying is how reliable is the threat actor. And I know 
it sounds kind of silly, thinking about the reliability of a 
threat actor, but today we find that a lot of criminals, they 
do demonstrate a certain level of reliability because they have 
recognized their business model actually depends on that.
    You also need to understand whether or not the threat 
actors stole data from the organization before deploying 
decrypters--or before deploying encrypters across the 
enterprise. And if they stole data, there is obviously the risk 
of publishing that information. And we find that many victim 
organizations choose to pay because they feel that it is in 
their best interest to protect the sensitivity and the privacy 
of their customers and their business partners' information 
from being exposed on the internet.
    The next thing that organizations need to think about is 
does the threat actor still have active access to the 
environment, and, if they do, can they escalate their attack 
and conduct more disruption?
    You also need to understand whether or not cyber insurance 
will cover the claim.
    And finally, you really need to think about is the threat 
actor sanctioned by the United States Government, and is it 
actually legal to pay the threat actor?
    So those are some of the considerations that we talk to our 
clients about. And it is always our clients' decisions as to 
whether or not they should pay or not. But we want to actually 
walk them through the considerations.
    So let me actually share some of the observations that we 
have learned when victims have actually paid threat actors.
    Well, first of all, you can't just pay a threat actor and 
hope they go away. Technically, they have multiple different 
back doors to get access back into the environment if they want 
to. Many times we do find that they tend to move on, and move 
on to the next victim. They don't tend to come back, once they 
are paid, but technically, they do have the ability to do that.
    You don't know who you are paying. You have no idea if you 
are paying a sanctioned entity. You have no idea if you are 
paying a terrorist organization. You don't know who you are 
paying. It is typically a responsibility of a separate company 
that engages in the negotiations with a threat actor and actual 
facilitation of payment. And a lot of times they are the ones 
that are actually trying to figure out who is being paid. But 
at the end of the day, you never know who is actually getting 
the money.
    As I mentioned before, many threat actors are actually 
reliable because, again, they are--their business model depends 
on it. Reliability certainly, you know, depends on who the 
threat actor is. Many times we find that threat actors will 
provide working tools to be able to recover your systems and 
data. And they also provide a promise to delete the data that 
they have stolen from the victim environment. Of course, you 
never actually have any real guarantees that the data was 
actually deleted that was stolen from the victim environment.
    We do anticipate, at some point in time, that some of the 
data that was stolen--and for those threat actors that were 
paid, we do anticipate that they will likely publish 
information and the stolen data at a later point in time, 
especially as time goes on.
    In conclusion, I would like to thank you for this 
opportunity to testify before the subcommittee. The ransomware 
and the multifaceted problem has become at a level that is 
completely intolerable, and we need to come together as a 
community to better address the problem. Thank you.
    [The prepared statement of Mr. Carmakal follows:]
    [GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
    
    Ms. DeGette. Thank you so much.
    The Chair now recognizes Mr. Reiner for 5 minutes.

                STATEMENT OF PHILIP JAMES REINER

    Mr. Reiner. Madam Chair DeGette, Ranking Member Griffith, 
Chairman Pallone, members of the subcommittee, thank you for 
the opportunity to testify today on the pervasive threat that 
ransomware poses to our national security. My name is Philip 
Reiner, and I am the chief executive officer of the Institute 
for Security and Technology.
    Our mission at IST is to create trusted venues where 
national security policymakers can engage with technology 
leaders to work together to devise solutions to emerging 
security threats. That is what allowed us to convene the 
Ransomware Task Force, of which I was the executive director. 
We were pleased to convene representatives from more than 60 
public and private organizations to devise a comprehensive 
framework for combating the ransomware threat.
    I will focus my testimony here today on three areas: first, 
on the top-line recommendations of that task force report; 
second, note some positive steps we have seen taken since that 
report launched in April; and third, note some items from the 
report that will require congressional action.
    As is often repeated, there is no single solution to this 
challenge. It poses too large of a threat for any one entity to 
address alone. The timing of this hearing is thus incredibly 
important. This is an international cybersecurity crisis, the 
scale and magnitude of which demands leadership and action. The 
task force determined four goals that should frame a 
comprehensive approach to deter, disrupt, prepare, and respond. 
These goals are interlocking and mutually reinforcing. This 
framework should be considered as a whole. To achieve these 
goals, the priority recommended actions were as follows.
    Number one, coordinated international diplomatic and law 
enforcement efforts must prioritize ransomware and work to 
eliminate criminal safe havens.
    Number two, the United States should and must lead by 
example and execute a sustained, aggressive, whole-of-
government, intelligence-driven antiransomware campaign, 
coordinated by the White House and in close collaboration with 
the private sector.
    Number three, governments should establish cyber response 
and recovery funds, mandate that organizations report ransom 
payment, and require organizations to consider alternatives 
first, before making any such payments.
    Number four, a clear, accessible framework must be 
developed to help organizations prepare for and respond to 
ransomware attacks.
    And then number five, the cryptocurrency sector must be 
better understood and more closely regulated to prevent further 
facilitation of ransomware.
    Since April, encouraging actions have been taken, some of 
which have been noted already. These include the recent White 
House launch of an interagency Ransomware Task Force. This is a 
critical initial step, as the United States needs to execute a 
campaign that leverages all tools of national power: 
diplomatic, economic, intelligence, law enforcement, and 
military. Again, this must be done in close cooperation with 
the private sector in order to be successful.
    Additionally, the call for leader-level diplomatic 
prioritization of these issues, in some ways, has been heated. 
President Biden has repeatedly asserted that ransomware is a 
top priority and included this as a top-three item in his 
recent summit with Russian President Putin. Similar 
prioritization by the United Kingdom, the G7, the EU, 
Australia, and others continues this necessary trend. These 
declarations are great initial steps and need to be followed up 
on with action. DOJ and DHS have their own internal ransomware-
focused efforts. The National Institute of Standards and 
Technology has released an initial ransomware profile. Also, 
seven large U.S.-based insurers have established a consortium 
to share data. Followthrough will be the key for all of these 
steps and, hopefully, for many more that are to come.
    Finally, a number of recommended steps from the report can 
be highlighted that necessitate congressional action, which 
include but are not limited to requiring organizations to 
report ransomware payment information prior to payment, 
requiring further steps to shore up the cryptocurrency 
ecosystem, providing clarification of lawful defensive measures 
that private-sector actors can take, requiring local 
governments and managed service providers to adopt limited 
baseline security measures, and creating a ransomware response 
fund to help incentivize the nonpayment of ransoms.
    Congress has a critical role to play in a whole-of-
government response to this threat, and the Institute for 
Security and Technology welcomes the opportunity to inform the 
work of this committee. Thank you for your leadership, and I 
look forward to your questions.
    [The prepared statement of Mr. Reiner follows:]
    [GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
    
    Ms. DeGette. Thank you so much, and thank you to the entire 
witness panel for excellent testimony. It is now time for our 
questioning, and the Chair will recognize herself for 5 
minutes.
    As I said in my opening statement, senior cyber experts 
from the government have expressed concern about some of the 
private sector's compliance with cyber hygiene requirements, 
and the limits of----
    Voice. This meeting is being recorded.
    Ms. DeGette. Thank you. And the limits of the Federal 
Government's existing authorities to manage the problem.
    So, as Congress, it is our job to make sure that the 
executive branch has the authorities it needs. I want to hear 
from each one of you about this.
    Mr. Reiner, your testimony identifies eight priority 
considerations for Congress. Which two or three of those would 
be the most impactful, and why?
    Mr. Reiner. Madam Chair, thank you for the question. I 
appreciate the sentiment that there is much more that companies 
can be doing. I think----
    Ms. DeGette. Sir, I have 5 minutes. So if you can tell me 
which two or three of the actions you identify would be most 
impactful, I think that would be helpful.
    Mr. Reiner. Yes, ma'am.
    Ms. DeGette. Thank you.
    Mr. Reiner. As the report laid out, I think one of the 
steps that can be taken for organizations, as part of potential 
grants that can be provided, that they need to expand a certain 
percentage of their efforts on cybersecurity----
    Ms. DeGette. OK.
    Mr. Reiner [continuing]. To basically raise their baseline 
application of their own funds in order to receive national 
grants.
    Ms. DeGette. Federal.
    Mr. Reiner Another element that the task force put forward 
was that, in order to receive grant funding, was that a company 
would have to meet the baseline requirements that are put 
forward in the framework that we described in the report, that 
NIST put forward----
    Ms. DeGette. So--but basically, what you are saying is tie 
government grants to good hygiene.
    Mr. Reiner. Yes, ma'am.
    Ms. DeGette. Ms. Walden, I wanted to ask you, your 
testimony cites a Microsoft study which estimates ``more than 
99 percent of cyber attacks would have been prevented if 
multifactor authentication were deployed.'' So do you think 
that we should mandate basic cyber hygiene requirements through 
legislation? And if so, which ones?
    Ms. Walden. Thank you, Chair. Yes, so we published a report 
that 99 percent of cybersecurity attacks would not have 
happened without--because of multifactor authentication. So I 
think that you should encourage basic cyber hygiene principles 
like multi----
    Ms. DeGette. Do you think we should mandate it?
    Ms. Walden. I think I agree that we should require it, yes.
    Ms. DeGette. OK, thank you.
    Ms. Walden. Yes.
    Ms. DeGette. Now, Mr. Lee, in your testimony you seem to 
agree that additional cybersecurity requirements could be 
helpful but cautioned that we shouldn't be regulating the 
``how.'' Can you explain very briefly what you mean by that?
    What do you think the most effective legislative or 
regulatory requirements would look like?
    Mr. Lee. Absolutely, thank you. Generally speaking, we need 
to be more outcomes-driven. And so a lot of times companies 
will be told ``you must install antivirus,'' ``you must do the 
patching within seven days,'' or whatever that kind of 
prescriptive requirement is. But across our different 
infrastructure, especially in our operations side of the house, 
things can be so varied. And we need to tell them what are we 
actually trying to solve for.
    Ms. DeGette. OK----
    Mr. Lee. ``We want you to be able to respond this 
quickly,'' or so forth.
    Ms. DeGette. To be results oriented.
    Mr. Carmakal, your testimony cites to a white paper 
published by Mandiant that outlines the priority technical 
actions companies should take--ideally, prior to a ransomware 
event. And I am wondering if you have seen widespread adoption 
of those recommendations. And if not, what can we do to help 
companies implement those actions?
    Mr. Carmakal. Thank you, Chairwoman. So we basically built 
that white paper as a documentation of the playbook that we use 
when we conduct incident response exercises. And so these are 
the types of things that we recommend to organizations after a 
breach. But certainly, those could be applied beforehand.
    Unfortunately, not enough organizations are taking that 
knowledge and applying it within the organizations. We would 
love to see greater adoption. Unfortunately, a lot of the 
things that we see day in, day out, from a response 
perspective, shows that they----
    Ms. DeGette. So what can we do to either encourage or 
mandate them to----
    Mr. Carmakal. I would certainly love for more encouragement 
of organizations to try to learn from other breached entities. 
And that white paper is a good example of those learnings.
    I don't know that I would necessarily say that you need to 
mandate it, but more encouragement----
    Ms. DeGette. But Mr. Reiner has a good suggestion, though, 
which is to tie it to government grants. So you need to meet a 
certain standard if you are going to get your public funding. 
What do you think of that idea?
    Mr. Carmakal. Generally, I think that sounds like a good 
idea.
    Ms. DeGette. Great. Finally, Dr. Dameff, as a medical 
doctor and cyber researcher, you have an interesting 
perspective to share. I am wondering if you can talk if there 
are specific issues in the healthcare industry, and what this 
committee--we have jurisdiction over healthcare policy--what we 
can do to ensure good cyber compliance. Briefly.
    Dr. Dameff. Thank you, Madam Chair. One of the most 
important things I can articulate today is the need for 
additional information. It is very difficult to measure the 
impacts of a cyber attack on a patient. In other industries you 
can measure the cost in dollars and cents. That is immediately 
understandable. Or downtimes resulting in increased gas prices. 
But in healthcare we do not have the infrastructure in place to 
get the basic data, to measure what happens to our patients.
    And what really matters is whether or not they walk or talk 
after a stroke, or whether or not they survive after a heart 
attack. Without measuring those very basic things through 
things like NIH funding, scientific inquiry, we don't even know 
the magnitude of the problem or the impact on our patients.
    Ms. DeGette. Thank you. The Chair now will recognize 
Ranking Member Griffith for the purposes of asking questions 
for 5 minutes.
    Mr. Griffith. All right, Dr. Dameff, and this is not on my 
list of questions, but it came up as a part of feeding off of 
Chairwoman DeGette's questions.
    Ms. Walden said, you know, we could have prevented a lot of 
these hacks with multifactor identification. You are an 
emergency room doctor. How is that going to work? Because it is 
easy to say here, but how is it going to work in your emergency 
room?
    Dr. Dameff. That is a great, great insight. Thank you for 
the question. There are technical controls that will definitely 
improve the cybersecurity posture of hospitals. Those should be 
employed, right? Many hospitals are deploying multifactor 
authentication, or already have, for protecting patient data.
    You identify a key element here, which is that patient care 
cannot be hindered in the emergency sense by overly--over-
security controls that impact patient care. I will say this, 
though. It is not necessarily about which controls can prevent 
the infection. Honestly, I am of the belief that we should 
prepare for an inevitable attack and then have a backup system 
in place to restore patient care as quickly as possible, and 
rely on that until you can restore that. That is how you save 
lives. That is what you do, is focus on your immediate response 
to restoring patient care, while those technological systems 
come back online.
    Mr. Griffith. All right. So my next question would be how 
expensive is that going to be?
    And let me give you a reason why I am concerned about this. 
I represent a large rural district. In a portion of my district 
the previously competing hospital chains, for financial 
reasons, were forced to merge, and they were given clearance by 
both State of Virginia, the Federal Government, and the State 
of Tennessee to basically have a monopoly in that area. So I 
have got one hospital system serving many counties in east 
Tennessee and southwest Virginia. How expensive is it going to 
be for them, because they are under financial stress already, 
to set up this good hygiene?
    And do they--how are we going to fix that? I mean, how 
expensive is what you are talking about? Because, in this case, 
should what happened in San Diego happen there, there are no 
hospitals to send these folks to that aren't at least an hour 
to an hour and a half away, maybe further than that for some of 
the folks. What are we going to do? Help me.
    Dr. Dameff. Again, thank you for that fantastic question. 
The consolidation of healthcare, exactly as you mentioned, has 
increased the risk to patient safety from ransomware attacks 
because of the shared infrastructure and technology among many 
hospitals in a specific geographic location. We have seen that. 
That is what happened 2 months ago, is that a single healthcare 
delivery organization that was infected, five hospitals in a 
geographic location were devastated. That exactly would impact 
patient care, potentially.
    And your identification of critical-access hospitals as 
being a target, potentially, of attack, as well as the patient 
harm implications cannot be overstated.
    Specifically, how are they going to afford this? Really, 
two things. One, that disaster resiliency that I mentioned 
before, restoring technical systems in the background but 
having a manual, nontechnical process to take care of patients 
in the meantime, that already exists at most hospitals. That is 
emergency response. That is disaster medicine. They prepare for 
earthquakes and hurricanes and have plans in place to do that. 
They should enact that--or they should prepare for that in a 
cyber context.
    The second thing is that, it is true, it is going to be 
costly for a lot of the technical controls, and there are 
hospitals out there that cannot afford it. They will simply not 
be able to. I worked at hospitals and took care of COVID 
patients in resource-stricken hospitals, wherein they were 
concerned they were going to run out of ventilators. How do we 
expect them to be able to defend against cyber attackers and 
spend millions of dollars, potentially, to increase their 
cybersecurity posture?
    It is going to require some creative solutions. Quite 
frankly, I don't see any----
    Mr. Griffith. So what you are saying is that is a problem 
we are going to have to solve.
    Dr. Dameff. Yes, I think that is going to be a big, big 
problem you have to solve.
    Mr. Griffith. I appreciate that, and I tend to be tight 
with Federal dollars, but this may be one area we don't have 
any choice.
    Let me say also, for us to provide assistance to an 
organization, we need to know in advance, or we need to know 
when it happens, if they are being attacked. And of course, 
there are many reasons for not telling us. And you and Mr. 
Carmakal want to--might want to tag-team on this one, if I have 
time--I am running out.
    But particularly related to hospitals, should we be looking 
at, if not mandating, having a minimum requirement that would 
then give the hospitals some protection? If they have done 
their cyber--the good cyber hygiene to a minimal requirement 
that perhaps the Federal Government sets up or industry sets 
up, that they would then be limited on liability in any suits 
that might follow, where a patient's health was affected, do 
you think that is--that idea would work?
    Dr. Dameff. I am definitely in support of ways we can 
incentivize instead of slowly penalize hospitals for trying to 
take care of patients. That is really key. Perhaps tying it to 
reimbursement, for example, wherein if you meet a certain 
cybersecurity threshold of protections, you can see increased 
reimbursements for some of your medical care as a way to 
incentivize. I could see that as one potential mechanism where 
we can achieve even the most rural and critical-access 
hospitals achieving the appropriate amount of cybersecurity 
protections.
    Mr. Griffith. All right, and if Madam Chair will give me 
just the patience for a second, Ms. Walden, if you can get to 
me in writing later, what do we do about cryptocurrencies and 
its involvement in all of this?
    Just--if you can cite me some articles later or whatever, 
and we will probably send you a written question on that, as 
well, and I yield back.
    Ms. Walden. I am happy to.
    Ms. DeGette. I thank the gentleman. The Chair now 
recognizes the full committee chairman, Mr. Pallone, for 5 
minutes.
    Mr. Pallone. Thank you, Chairwoman DeGette. One of my 
concerns is that ransomware is a very sophisticated form of 
attack, and it is not clear to me that smaller companies and, 
to some extent, even larger companies have the resources or 
tools needed to deal with these threats. So I was pleased to 
see the StopRansomware.gov website that was launched by the 
Biden administration last week, and--because it provides a new 
resource hub for small businesses and other organizations.
    But I mean, that is a good start, but I am wondering if we 
can and should be doing more to assist U.S. companies, 
particularly small to medium-sized businesses, to deal with 
these threats. So let me start with Mr. Carmakal.
    Given your experience in incident response, can you explain 
the types of resources that companies need, once they find 
themselves in the midst of a ransomware attack?
    Mr. Carmakal. Yes, absolutely. Unfortunately, a lot of 
these small organizations, some of them don't even have 
security staffs. Some of them rely on IT resources to perform 
security functionality.
    When I think back to October of 2020, when we saw an acute 
problem against healthcare organizations, I talked to a lot of 
hospitals that were taken offline, couldn't take care of 
patients leveraging digital technology. They ended up having to 
divert patients to other hospitals. And I ended up talking to 
the IT resources, who were trying to desperately get their 
systems back online. They didn't know anything about digital 
forensics. They didn't know anything about threat actors. They 
didn't know how to respond to the intrusions. And so it was a 
very difficult situation for those organizations to face, and I 
really do feel for a lot of the smaller organizations that 
don't have dedicated security teams.
    So, look, to the extent possible I want organizations to do 
the best that they can, from a, you know, cyber hygiene 
perspective. But I don't believe the onus is fully on the 
organizations themselves. I think there is a shared 
responsibility----
    Mr. Pallone. Well, what kind of resources would they need 
is what I am asking.
    Mr. Carmakal. Yes, I think they would need--well, I think 
they would need government support. And, from a government 
support perspective, I think there are things that government 
could do in terms of indictments, arrests of individuals that 
are behind these attacks.
    I think there is more information sharing that could occur 
for victim organizations that could be applicable to other 
organizations out there.
    I think there are, you know, things in terms of disruption 
that government can do to curb the problem of ransomware, so 
that these smaller organizations that don't have the resources 
and the staff have some additional government support.
    Mr. Pallone. But I guess--and let me go to Mr. Reiner. I 
know that there's, you know, law enforcement agencies that 
assist, and a lot of what Mr. Carmakal mentioned relates to 
that. But are we providing--are there a variety of resources 
beyond just, you know, the traditional--or some of the law 
enforcement, you know, such as technical expertise that the 
government can or should be providing, or can the government 
provide help in assessing the scope of their situation?
    I know he discussed some of that, but if you would respond 
also, Mr. Reiner.
    Mr. Reiner. Yes, Mr. Chairman. I think, through the process 
that we conducted for the Ransomware Task Force, I mean, there 
was an array--really, a list of things that we put forward that 
we believe could be done to get ahead of this, right? So to get 
to the left of boom, so that you better equip companies to be 
able to defend themselves.
    As has been discussed, though, a lot of those organizations 
really don't have the capability to do so. So CISA and other 
departments and agencies, I believe, can be very well 
positioned to help share that information, provide those tools 
in advance for free. But folks don't know about it. They are 
not even aware that it exists. So how do you get it to them?
    Awareness campaigns are often belittled as not effective 
enough and not quick, but there needs--there can be a lot more 
to get the information out there that there are tools that are 
available. StopRansomware.gov, for example: great idea, 
fantastic amalgamation of government resources. How do you tell 
people that that is something that they can turn to and 
utilize?
    I think there is one piece here that is incredibly 
important that came up over and over again through the process 
that we conducted, which was that departments and agencies that 
are responsible for doing this don't have the resources that 
they need in order to develop those tools to engage those 
private-sector partners to actually get that word out. NIST, 
DHS, other departments--Commerce, other departments and 
agencies really could use buttressing of resources, so that the 
folks who are really specifically responsible for that training 
and that piece of it have more capacity to do so.
    Mr. Pallone. OK. Just quickly, Ms. Walden, when you talk 
about cybersecurity--I mean cryptocurrency, I am sorry--again, 
I don't think the small business owner knows much about how to 
purchase or trade that. So how do you see--in other words, if a 
small business is faced with having to pay ransom, for example, 
in cryptocurrency, how likely is it they are going to be able 
to navigate that? And what resources would they need?
    There's only 20 seconds left, but if you could just 
comment.
    Ms. Walden. Well, first, hopefully, small business would 
opt not to pay the ransom.
    Mr. Pallone. Right.
    Ms. Walden. But if they chose to pay the ransom, the 
criminal actors are actually quite helpful. They have a bit of 
customer service. Their ransomware notes will instruct the 
victim on how to or where to obtain, usually, Bitcoin, because 
Bitcoin is a lot easier to obtain than other types of 
cryptocurrency. But there are avenues for small businesses to 
be able to obtain cryptocurrency.
    Mr. Pallone. Your recommendation is don't pay, though, 
sure.
    Ms. Walden. But my recommendation is do not pay.
    [Laughter.]
    Mr. Pallone. Right, thanks a lot. Take care.
    Ms. DeGette. I thank the gentleman. The Chair now 
recognizes Mr. Burgess for 5 minutes.
    Mr. Burgess. I thank the Chair, and I thank our panel for 
being here today.
    It is, obviously, not the first hearing we have had on 
this. It is a little remarkable to me that we don't have law 
enforcement as part of the panel, however. It has come up in 
previous panel discussions that law enforcement can only go 
after people that they know they need to go after. And it has 
also come up in the past that there are disincentives to 
report.
    Dr. Dameff, you have kind of mentioned that it could be--
the reputational damage can be significant from your hospital 
or hospital network.
    In the past I have wondered if the construction of the 
Office of Civil Rights, the data breach reporting that was 
created as part of the HITECH Act back in 2009, if this is a 
disincentive to reporting. Once a company becomes listed, or 
once a healthcare entity becomes listed on that, it is--they 
are, essentially, archived forever. And I have wondered if we 
should have a statute of limitations, or a statute of repose or 
some remedial actions that can be taken by an organization that 
would allow them to extricate themselves from that list. Is 
that something that has come up in any of your discussions? For 
anyone on the panel.
    Dr. Dameff, I will just ask you specifically, since you 
work in a hospital.
    Dr. Dameff. Thank you. The question of whether or not 
reporting record breaches--as part of their mandatory 
reporting, whether or not that inhibits potential reporting of 
ransomware impacts, I think is still unknown. I will say, 
anecdotally speaking, I could see how that would prevent 
individual organizations from wishing to report or perhaps 
delay the impact of the reporting until they are--to anticipate 
what might potentially be a large punitive fine.
    There also--when a hospital is hit with ransomware, they 
are also trying to restore operational capacity to take care of 
patients.
    Mr. Burgess. Yes.
    Dr. Dameff. And there are so many competing things 
happening at that exact moment, it is difficult to then report.
    Mr. Burgess. Let me ask you about that, because you brought 
that up. And we have spent a lot of time in this subcommittee 
and other subcommittees talking during the pandemic about the 
Strategic National Stockpile. Of course, the creation of the 
Strategic National Stockpile was in an emergent situation. You 
could deliver a set of things to an institution that they would 
need to function in whatever the emergency--earthquake, 
hurricane, flood.
    So is it possible to have an urgent deliverable of what you 
would need to run your--say, your emergency room at your 
hospital, if you were just completely shut down with a 
ransomware attack? Is that something that we should look at?
    Dr. Dameff. I definitely agree it is something we should 
look into.
    One of my recommendations is coming up with metrics to 
measure the impact to a hospital. And hospitals that have 
severe attacks that would be devastating to patient care might 
benefit from such a resource, akin to something like the FEMA 
DMAT response, in which----
    Mr. Burgess. Right.
    Dr. Dameff [continuing]. Outside resources, personnel, 
systems, tents, et cetera, could be deployed rapidly to help 
alleviate those patient care constraints, while they are 
restoring systems. It is definitely something that should be 
looked into. We have never seen anything like that before.
    Mr. Burgess. So at this point we don't even know--if there 
is a major hospital system that gets attacked, we don't know, 
downstream, is there a loss of life, was there--as you pointed 
out, during the course of treatment of a stroke, is there a 
loss of function that could have been preserved? We just don't 
know the answer to those questions, do we?
    Dr. Dameff. And that is why I recommend in my testimony 
here that there be mandatory reporting for severe attacks on 
patient safety implications.
    One of the barriers to that is that systems in which we 
measure care quality and patient safety are themselves targets 
of the ransomware.
    What do I mean? The way that we measure the quality about a 
stroke care or a heart attack or something else is measured and 
recorded in the electronic health record. The electronic health 
record is ransomed.
    Mr. Burgess. Yes.
    Dr. Dameff. So we don't even have tools to measure that, 
because they are also collateral damage from the actual attack.
    Mr. Burgess. Let me ask you this. And, you know, in order 
to get the proper metrics, in order to get the proper--be 
able--for us to make proper decisions, you are going to have to 
get proper information. It is hard to get proper information if 
people are scared to report.
    You and I--I am a physician, also--we live in the world of 
the National Practitioner Data Bank, right? There is a central 
location that a hospital credentialing committee can query as 
to whether or not we have had a problem in other cities and we 
are just taking our problems from town to town. Do you think 
there would be a benefit from having something structured along 
the lines of a National Practitioner Data Bank for data 
breaches, for ransomware attacks?
    Dr. Dameff. Forgive me, for individual physicians or for 
healthcare delivery organizations?
    Mr. Burgess. For the healthcare organization writ large.
    Dr. Dameff. I do believe that we should get visibility on 
the differences in organizations that are under attack. But to 
penalize them, or to fine them significantly would reduce their 
ability to bounce back from that attack, deliver care. And so, 
whether or not it should be like a National Provider Data Base 
but for healthcare ransomware attacks, I would support any 
efforts that collect additional metrics on ransomware attacks 
and to make that data transparent and public.
    Mr. Burgess. Yes, the difficulty there is, though, when we 
get--then you drive--you are driving a fear factor: I don't 
want to report, because I don't want to be included.
    Ms. DeGette. The gentleman's time has expired. The Chair 
now recognizes----
    Mr. Burgess. I am going to send you some questions in 
writing on that, as well as other members of the panel.
    I appreciate you----
    Ms. DeGette. The Chair now recognizes Ms. Kuster for 5 
minutes.
    Ms. Kuster. Thank you very much, Chair DeGette. I 
appreciate you holding this hearing today.
    Today's discussion regarding ransomware attacks and the 
growing threats that they pose presents a unique opportunity 
for this subcommittee to identify existing vulnerabilities and 
gather information on actions Congress can take to respond to 
this emerging threat.
    As we have heard today, ransomware attacks are not new, but 
they are certainly increasing in number and sophistication in 
recent years. We continue to see front-page news reports on 
this attack, but it is not just the high-profile ones that are 
occurring. The implications of these attacks have a far-
reaching effect beyond the companies that are being targeted.
    The attack on Colonial Pipeline's information technology 
system a few months ago had a significant disruption in energy 
distribution on the entire East Coast that led to delivery 
delays for businesses, and gas stations closed for over 
millions of Americans. This is just one example of why we need 
to explore what makes these companies vulnerable to begin with, 
and what they can do about it.
    Ms. Walden, you state your testimony that ``applying basic 
cybersecurity hygiene can prevent a cyber criminal's ability to 
ransom a system.'' For the benefit of the business owners who 
may be watching this hearing, Ms. Walden, what are the most 
common vulnerabilities that put companies at risk of a 
ransomware attack?
    Ms. Walden. Thank you for the question. Yes, that is true. 
You--the best way to resolve a ransomware is to make sure that 
it can't get into the system in the first place.
    So there are some simple things that are just true for 
preventing cyber attacks in general: enabling multifactor 
authentication; doing better training of your employees and 
staff on identifying phishing and preventing the click; 
segmenting your network--and those are tools for CISOs to take, 
but segmenting your network so that cyber criminals, once they 
are in, can't laterally move. But these are some of the simple 
cyber hygiene activities that small and medium businesses can 
and should take to prevent ransomware or any other cyber 
criminal attack.
    Ms. Kuster. Thank you. And I know, as Members of Congress, 
we are learning to do our best in that regard, as well.
    It is clear that companies need to be giving increased 
attention to cybersecurity. But the amount of threats and 
vulnerabilities can be overwhelming. Mr. Carmakal, if you were 
running a medium-sized company, what are two or three things 
that you would do right away, across the board to protect your 
systems and data?
    Mr. Carmakal. Yes, thank you, ma'am. Great question. 
There's a few things I would do.
    Number one, to the best of my ability, I would try to 
enable multifactor authentication on all remote access into my 
organization.
    Number two, I would try to educate my employees as best as 
they can to identify phishing emails. But I do need to 
recognize that employees will always fall victim to phishing 
emails at some point in time, so I need to provide technology 
to block as many of those malicious emails as possible, and 
also provide technology and processes so that, if something 
does get past the initial security system, we have got other 
checks and balances to be able to identify the attack as it 
occurs.
    The third thing I would do is try to, to the best of my 
ability, install all the security patches that I can and that I 
know about across my environment.
    Ms. Kuster. Very helpful, thank you.
    I note that some cybersecurity measures are very expensive, 
especially if they involve reconfiguring entire networks, but 
the cost of these attacks is also increasing. Mr. Reiner, is it 
fair to say that investments in cybersecurity are good returns 
on investment?
    And what more can be done to incentivize companies to make 
these changes or spread the word about the necessity of 
addressing vulnerabilities?
    Mr. Reiner. You know--thank you for the question. As we 
have spoken about extensively as part of the Ransomware Task 
Force, is that--investing in this up front is much more 
affordable than having to, as you describe, having to 
reconstitute your entire organization after an attack. So 
absolutely, putting the investment up front in order to stay 
left of boom and make sure that these are not attacks that can 
actually get into your system, is absolutely where folks should 
be putting their resources.
    I think the thing that can be reverted back to a little bit 
is what we were talking about before, which is getting the 
information out to those folks who don't really have the 
resources. One of the things that we delved into was in this 
spectrum of organizations there are companies that know, that 
have resources, but choose not to invest. How do you help 
inform their decision making, so that they choose to do so? You 
incentivize them through some of the steps that we have spoken 
about here today, tying grant making, relieving penalties if 
they are compliant, et cetera.
    I think there are organizations out there, though, that 
simply do not know that this is happening, and they do not have 
the resources in order to prepare in advance. We have to do 
better, I think, in terms of getting to them and letting them 
know what it is that they can be doing better.
    Everything that was just described--multifactor 
authentication, et cetera--those are simple things that folks 
can be considering. We need to get that information to them----
    Ms. Kuster. Sorry to cut you off----
    Ms. DeGette. The gentlelady----
    Ms. Kuster. I need to yield back. Thank you.
    Ms. DeGette. The Chair now recognizes Mrs. Rodgers for 5 
minutes.
    Mrs. Rodgers. Thank you, Madam Chair.
    Earlier this year Scripps Health was hit with a ransomware 
attack. In the attack, the cyber criminals stole data on about 
150,000 patients and caused significant disruptions in 
operations. A family member of mine--or a family member of, 
really, a constituent of mine--was directly affected by this 
attack, and so I have heard firsthand how devastating it was 
and the impact on their health. The Scripps attack is a stark 
reminder of the stakes of cybersecurity. When the hospitals are 
hit, it can literally be life or death.
    Mr. Dameff, these attacks can have a direct impact on 
patient health and outcomes. Can you help us better understand 
the cyber threat hospitals face today, and provide a few 
examples of situations where a patient's health was negatively 
impacted by a cybersecurity or ransomware attack?
    Dr. Dameff. Thank you. It is true that, in some medical 
conditions, minutes matter. For example, we have sometimes 
minutes to hours to treat a stroke, wherein our medications and 
our treatments will no longer benefit that patient after a 
certain amount of time. The same is true for things like 
certain heart attacks. And our ability to diagnose a patient is 
tied to the technology that we use every day, as clinicians, 
that technology we are so dependent on.
    So you can imagine, during a large ransomware attack, 
wherein these technical systems are no longer available, that 
we can't do our jobs as clinicians. I jokingly say I am the 
generation of doctors that has never used paper records. Until 
early on in my fellowship training, I had never had written a 
prescription.
    The future of healthcare is not going back to the days of 
antiquated systems. In the future, we are only more 
technologically tied to our systems that we use. That--when it 
is not there, we can't do our jobs well enough. It takes longer 
to get test results, to make decisions to give things like 
antibiotics in severe infections, or to identify when patients 
have certain conditions.
    So you can imagine at that--at a scale of not just one or 
two patients, but of a--you know, 5 or 6 or 10 hospitals down 
at once, where you could imagine that would impact care along 
the continuum, not just patients in the emergency department, 
patients in clinics, patients in the ICU, patients that are in 
ambulances that have to be transported longer distances because 
hospitals under attack are on diversion. These are all examples 
of how patients could potentially be impacted by this.
    I will say, though, we do not have the ability to measure 
that impact. As mentioned previously, the systems in which we 
measure care quality and patient safety themselves are digital, 
are affected by the ransomware attacks. So I fear we don't even 
have the tools now to answer that basic question.
    Furthermore, I would say that these types of attacks are 
exceptionally chaotic, and there's a lot of things happening at 
once. The ability for hospitals to report on that type of thing 
is nearly impossible as they attempt to restore their systems.
    Mrs. Rodgers. OK. As a followup, you have expertise in the 
field of medicine and cybersecurity. In your opinion, what 
steps should hospitals take to better secure their networks 
against cyber attacks?
    Dr. Dameff. I think it is shared among many of the panel, 
the same types of technical controls: multifactor 
authentication, focusing on rigorous backup, and restorations. 
But there is--my number-one recommendation would be to prepare 
for an inevitable ransomware attack, to practice and prepare 
for taking care of patients without systems, and to be able to 
do that at--within 2 or 3 hours of an attack.
    There are a lot of hospitals in this country that have not 
considered this type of attack on their systems, have not 
prepared adequately for it, have not put in place how to take 
care of 1,000 patients without technology. That is the number-
one thing I would encourage most hospitals across the country 
to do now. There is a framework for that at every hospital. And 
that type of preparation, at least in its beginning, doesn't 
cost a dime.
    Mrs. Rodgers. Thank you.
    Ms. Walden, what are the ways the private sector can 
partner with government to address ransomware attacks?
    Ms. Walden. Thank you for that question. The government has 
legal authorities that the private sector doesn't have, right? 
They have law enforcement authorities, they have intelligence 
authorities. The private sector, frankly, has a lot of signals. 
But if you match those things together, we can do coordinated 
actions to bring cyber criminals to justice.
    So law enforcement can bring the criminal to justice. 
Private sector can work along with law enforcement to identify 
those criminals. But we can also work with law enforcement to 
tear down the infrastructure that they use.
    Mrs. Rodgers. So what do you believe we need to be doing, 
as far as coordinating between the two, then?
    Ms. Walden. I believe that we need--and I know I keep 
saying it over and over again, but we need actionable 
information sharing. I like to be able to exchange ideas and 
signals and technology with my government partners to be able 
to get at the problem together.
    Mrs. Rodgers. So how are we doing?
    Ms. Walden. From the digital crimes perspective, we have 
great relationships with all of U.S. law enforcement, but we 
also have great relationships with other countries and their 
law enforcement. I think this administration is taking the--
cyber crime and cybersecurity seriously, and they are signaling 
the right things, the right messages to would-be cyber 
criminals and cyber criminals across the globe. And I think 
working with our allies is working pretty well. There is still 
a lot to do, but I think we have taken the best first step that 
we can.
    Mrs. Rodgers. OK, thank you. I yield back.
    Ms. DeGette. I thank the gentlelady. The Chair now 
recognizes Miss Rice for 5 minutes.
    Miss Rice. Thank you, Madam Chair.
    Mr. Carmakal, can you speak more about ransom payments, and 
how we should be treating them?
    And, you know, you talked a little bit about what the 
motivation is to pay them or not to pay them. Can you just 
expand on that a little bit?
    Mr. Carmakal. Yes, absolutely. Thank you for the question, 
ma'am.
    So, look, most organizations, they don't want to pay an 
extortion demand. They just feel that they have no other 
option. And, you know, for whatever reason, you know, maybe 
they feel like they need to accelerate the process of being 
able to recover their business operations, or perhaps they feel 
like they are doing the right thing to minimize the impact to 
their customers, or to their partners, or to maybe the 
intellectual property that they have, where they don't want 
that information to be published on the internet for anybody to 
be able to download.
    And so, you know, I have had an evolving position on ransom 
payments. Many years ago I was in the camp of, absolutely, you 
never want to pay an extortion demand, because we all grew up 
learning that, and we all grew up understanding you don't pay 
criminals, you----
    Miss Rice. Yes.
    Mr. Carmakal [continuing]. Don't give in to terrorist 
demands.
    But what I have learned is, over the years, many of my 
clients, against my recommendations, made payments and they 
actually saw relatively positive outcomes. They got access to 
their data, or perhaps they paid because they didn't want that 
information that was stolen to get published on the internet.
    And so I recognize that there are certain situations in 
which a company may choose to pay, and they might get some 
temporary benefit out of it. It is not necessarily going to be 
a long-term benefit. So the temporary benefit may be companies 
get access to their systems and data through the decryption 
tools that are provided by the threat actors. The potential 
long-term benefit is that the data that was stolen may never 
end up being published on the internet.
    But again, there's no guarantees that things won't show up 
down the road. And I do anticipate, over time, we will start to 
see threat actors that have been paid will end up publishing 
the data at some point down the road. And that was a pretty 
common thing, prior to 2019, for us to observe.
    Miss Rice. Mr. Reiner, that kind of brings me to one of the 
issues that you have raised, which is the need to understand 
and regulate cryptocurrency. Can you talk more about what we 
can do here, as a body, in that area?
    Mr. Reiner. Thank you for the question. It was a pillar of 
the conversations that we engaged in, as part of the of the 
Ransomware Task Force. This is a major facilitating element of 
what really has accelerated what we are dealing with, in terms 
of the ransomware threat today.
    The--from my perspective--and it really has been a learning 
experience for me to better understand specifically what are 
the choke points when it comes to cryptocurrency, the 
ecosystem. Where exactly can we focus our efforts to try and 
make it so that criminals cannot abuse these systems?
    These are incredibly innovative capabilities. I think that 
is a separate conversation.
    What can we actually do, though? We can work much more 
closely with the community that understands these systems and 
how they work, and get into the weeds as to how they are being 
abused. I do not think that that is very clearly and well 
understood broadly within government, but also in the private 
sector. And I think that would afford a great deal of 
opportunities, if we have that sort of information exchange and 
transparency, and understand it. You will see more clearly 
where it is that we can do more to stop criminal abuse of those 
payment systems. It is an incredibly complex web, because so 
much of it is really outside of jurisdictions.
    So there is this notion that we came up--or that was often 
noted in the process, this jurisdictional arbitrage. The United 
States is not alone in this effort. We have partners 
internationally that we can work very closely with, who have 
the ability to do things that we can't.
    Miss Rice. Well, who is doing it right?
    And, I mean, I think you mentioned that the--for Federal 
agencies that have jurisdiction over this issue----
    Mr. Reiner. Yes.
    Miss Rice. Is it a resource issue? Is it an intellectual 
capacity issue? Are we not able to hire the best and the 
brightest? What--where is the deficit?
    Mr. Reiner. I would argue, from the--so from where I sit, 
we see a wide variety of technologies that disrupt various 
elements of our society. This is a technological ecosystem that 
is very disruptive and it is incredibly innovative, and we are 
just behind the curve. We haven't--really quite yet understood 
what it--how it works, and how to get ahead of that, from a 
policy perspective. I think the policy is really playing 
catchup here.
    There are folks, I think, who are out there that can be 
relied upon, as Ms. Walden noted earlier, who are interested in 
playing a role to make sure that they are--they don't want 
their systems being abused. They want to be seen as legitimate, 
and they are willing to engage in these conversations. It is a 
conversation that we need to engender, though.
    To your question of who is doing it well, I think there is 
a lot of work that still needs to be done. Internationally, I 
don't know that there really is one that I would point to that 
is really doing it well yet. I think there is a lot of growth 
that we need to see happen there. But we can help lead on that 
effort, from the United States.
    Miss Rice. Thank you very much.
    Ms. DeGette. I thank the gentlelady. The Chair now 
recognizes Mr. McKinley for 5 minutes.
    Mr. McKinley. Thank you, Chairwoman DeGette. Thank you for 
the panel.
    I am a little frustrated that you all have put together a 
lot of efforts to try to help out and guide us, but even Johnny 
Wooden used to say there is some confusion over efforts versus 
accomplishments. And I am frustrated over the lack of 
accomplishments, because our U.S. laws on cyber crime were 
originated in 1987. And then our last international cyber 
agreement originated in 2001. So cyber criminals are exploiting 
these outdated laws, clearly, and they are targeting our 
critical infrastructure, as we have all talked about here, so 
far with it.
    And it is not just in America. Just in the last 2 years, we 
have seen a 500 percent increase in ransomware attacks and a 
300 percent increase in the amount of money that is being 
exchanged with this.
    So I looked back on the history of it since we have been 
chatting about this, these efforts. In the Ukraine, Russia 
attacked Ukraine in 2015 and 2016 and tried to destabilize 
their country. The Mexican oil company has been attacked, 
Pemex, by ransomware. The oil fields in Saudi Arabia were 
hacked by Iran in a retaliatory move. And then earlier this 
year, the water system in Florida was attacked. So--and then 
what you have heard also is the Colonial Pipeline. It was held 
for a ransom payment. And we understand, as was noted earlier, 
it provides oil for half the East Coast in this. And we saw the 
consequences. We saw increased prices and shortages with it.
    Yet these attacks on our critical infrastructure certainly, 
I think, could be mitigated with updated reforms to our 
international treaty, including some stiff, enforceable 
penalties. But--and also--and I believe it was you, Mr. 
Carmakal, was talking about cryptocurrency, understanding and 
getting control over cryptocurrency.
    But--so what I am saying to you, as an alternative, while 
you all work your magic and efforts, what about an 
accomplishment--if we could develop a redundancy in our energy 
system, a backup system?
    For example, earlier this year Texas suffered massive 
outages after an electric generation failure. It could have 
been avoided if they had had the ability to go backup, to 
connect to their neighboring States, to get electricity. This 
lack of redundancy in their electric grid has served as a--to 
me, a stark reminder as an alternative to avoiding problems 
like this.
    So--but President Biden and his people on the left, 
unfortunately, seem to be continuing to block this optional 
exchange of building additional pipelines as a redundant 
system. In this report that was just printed back in May, it 
talks about how this environmental council is not recommending 
any creation, maintenance, or expansion of pipelines in 
America. That is going to make us more vulnerable, to where 
hackers can get into our system.
    We look at the Keystone pipeline, Line 5 in Michigan; 
Williams Pipeline in New York; the Atlantic coastline, the 
Mountain Valley Pipeline, all in West Virginia, all were part 
of our critical national security, are under attack or have 
been canceled with it.
    So even Tom Seagal, in 2015, came before our committee, and 
he said that he could hand pick 10 engineers at Berkeley, and 
those 10 engineers, within just a matter of a few days, could 
shut down--4 days, he said--in 4 days could develop a system to 
shut down our electric grid between Boston and New York. That 
was testimony for our office. So we know these hacks are going 
to occur.
    But what we need--what I am looking for is, how do we 
develop--while the magic is developing, how do we deal with it?
    What are--how do we develop redundancy on this?
    So my question to all of you is would a reliable firewall--
while a firewall was being developed, or your systems being 
developed, would you support development of a redundant energy 
system for additional pipelines, so that if we do get hacked, 
we can go around it to--and we--I think it would lessen the 
attractiveness of attacking our pipelines if we could do a 
redundant backup system. Would you support that, any of you?
    I will start with you--I want to call you ``Dammit,'' but I 
know that is not right.
    Dr. Dameff. I would support any efforts to increase 
healthcare resiliency in the face of cyber attack, broadly. It 
is quite difficult to build redundant hospitals, for example. 
But there are----
    Mr. McKinley. I am talking about energy. I am primarily 
talking about energy. I will let the other people on this 
committee to deal with some of the other matters. But I think 
on energy, I think, our national security is at risk.
    I have run out of time, so I yield back. Thank you.
    Ms. DeGette. I thank the gentleman. The Chair now 
recognizes Ms. Schakowsky for 5 minutes.
    Ms. Schakowsky. So this has been pretty frustrating, 
actually, and I hear remarks like we are playing catchup, that 
it is--the cyber criminals are getting more and more 
sophisticated, and it does feel like we are--we have a lot of 
catching up to do.
    And I also heard that there is no one, internationally, 
that is necessarily doing better than we are.
    As a part of a legislative body--and I do believe that 
Chairman DeGette did ask the question--are there things that 
come to mind now, where we, as a legislative body--for example, 
I chair a subcommittee of the Energy and Commerce Committee 
that deals with consumer protection, and I am wondering if we 
should be thinking about or getting your advice on legislation 
that might address the problem that we are facing.
    I understand that it is totally multifaceted, that the 
executive branch has a huge role to play here, that it is 
beginning to do more of that. But can you advise us on the 
kinds of things that we could play?
    I--really, anybody can jump in. You are looking, you know, 
ready to go.
    Mr. Carmakal. I would love to take your question, ma'am.
    Ms. Schakowsky. Mr. Carmakal? OK.
    Mr. Carmakal. So, first of all, look, I am equally 
frustrated about the problem. Every week it is exhausting for 
incident responders to have to deal with highly disruptive 
attacks against organizations. And it feels like every week it 
gets worse and worse.
    But I do want to take a moment to celebrate the wins, 
because there has been a lot of wins out there, and I don't 
think we always celebrate that, or we don't celebrate it 
enough.
    Number one, I think organizations are defending themselves 
against attacks every single day. We may not talk about that 
publicly, but it happens a lot.
    Number two, I would like to----
    Ms. Schakowsky. Let me just ask. Do you think there should 
be any requirements for building in these security systems?
    Mr. Carmakal. I think there is a general expectation for 
most organizations to have cybersecurity controls and 
resiliency in place. Whether that is enforced by law or there 
is--generally expected by customers, I think that does exist.
    Ms. Schakowsky. Go ahead.
    Mr. Carmakal. Beyond that, I think there's a number of 
wins. If you look at some of the things that government has 
been able to do over the past few weeks and months--and I am 
pretty proud and excited that the Bureau was able to recover 
some of the funds that were paid by Colonial Pipeline to the 
threat actors. That was a pretty big win. And it is exciting to 
be able to see some of those actions taking place.
    It is pretty exciting to see some of the disruption to 
threat actor botnets like TrickBot and Emotet, and some of the 
more nefarious botnets that are operating out there, and that 
is a good example of public-private collaboration and 
coordination.
    Ms. Schakowsky. Well, I----
    Mr. Carmakal. Just this week----
    Ms. Schakowsky. I want to just interrupt for a second.
    Mr. Carmakal. Yes.
    Ms. Schakowsky. And then where does responsibility mainly 
lie?
    Should the Federal Government be required, then, to step in 
if there has been a failure in security that should have been 
considered by the--either the private sector, or----
    Mr. Carmakal. I think there is a shared responsibility from 
victim organizations, from security companies, from government. 
I don't think any one party can handle the problem on their 
own. It is going to require a concerted effort from multiple 
different parties, and I think we all need to step up, and we 
all need to celebrate the wins, and we need to actually 
continue to emphasize effort on the wins, on the things that 
have been happening successfully.
    And I look at things that the FBI is doing in terms of 
notifying victim organizations about upcoming intrusions. It is 
incredibly powerful when that happens, when somebody from the 
FBI calls a victim organization and says, ``There is a threat 
actor in your network today, and if you don't do something 
about it in the next 3 days, they are going to take your 
business offline.'' A lot of times that victim organization 
actually has the ability to call in for help and to disrupt the 
threat actors and eradicate them from the environment.
    So when we see actions like that from the government, I 
mean, it is incredible. You look at what happened earlier this 
week, or yesterday, with the indictments of a number of, you 
know, Chinese individuals that conducted intrusions over the 
past several years. Those indictments are good steps. They are 
good tools in the government's capability to try to curb the 
problem. So we would love to see much more of that happening.
    Ms. Schakowsky. Thank you.
    Ms. Walden, you said don't pay, that--so what is the 
alternative to that?
    Ms. Walden. Well, I think there are a few things that can 
take place and that Congress can do in order to prepare the 
country and to raise the maturity level of potential victims, 
and one is to create a recovery fund of some sort so that 
victims aren't alone in absorbing----
    Ms. Schakowsky. Could you turn on your microphone?
    Ms. Walden. Sorry, is that better?
    Ms. Schakowsky. Yes.
    Ms. Walden. Ah, sorry about that. A couple of things that 
Congress can do to make sure that victims are at a maturity 
level to be able to not pay, right?
    So one of those things, for example, is raising the 
baseline for cyber hygiene, bringing everybody to a 
cybersecurity maturity level that can handle it.
    Another would be to develop a cost recovery fund that will 
allow--that will help victims absorb--and the country, really--
to absorb the cost of critical infrastructure for having down 
operations.
    On the cryptocurrency piece, if I may, it is helpful to 
know which department or agency has authority over the crypto 
economy, whether it is--and the investors, right? Whether it is 
the SEC or the CFTC, that is a great start.
    So I also want to make a shameless plug for the Ransomware 
Task Force report. I think there are about a dozen or so 
potential legislative actions recommended in there.
    Ms. Schakowsky. Well, why don't--I would like----
    Ms. DeGette. I am sorry----
    Ms. Schakowsky [continuing]. To see those.
    Ms. DeGette [continuing]. The gentlelady's----
    Ms. Schakowsky. And I yield back, I am sorry. Thank you.
    Ms. DeGette. That is OK. The Chair now recognizes Mr. Dunn 
for 5 minutes.
    Mr. Dunn. Thank you very much, Madam Chair, and thank our 
panel.
    You know, recent ransomware and other cyber attacks have 
highlighted our vulnerabilities, showing the difficulties in 
holding those who perpetrate these attacks accountable. And it 
should not escape any of us that the vast majority of these 
significant cyber attacks originate from within countries that 
just happen to be our greatest foreign adversaries: Russia and 
China. It is my belief that the best defense is a good offense, 
and that goes for ransomware, as well. You know, we have to put 
Russia and China on notice that they will be held accountable 
for these organizations operating freely in their company.
    So, you know, I think back to the 2014 OPM hack. It put 
millions of Americans' records at risk, tens of millions. This 
was something, you know, that Congress and the American 
Government simply has to address.
    With that, Dr. Dameff, there has been a significant uptick 
in ransomware attacks on healthcare organizations, certainly 
since 2016. Now, I was amused when you said you had never 
written a note in a chart, you had always--EMRs. You know, I 
actually go back to the days when we had a lot of paper, and we 
got a lot of work done. So I would say, while technology--and, 
you know, it certainly has made huge, you know, advantages in 
medicine--I am concerned that we are not ready for cyber 
attacks. Is there a single vulnerability that you would point 
to that makes us--that is worse than any of our other 
vulnerabilities in healthcare?
    Dr. Dameff. Thank you so much for that question. If I could 
point to a single one, it is at the heart of what you 
mentioned, which was this hyper connectivity that was 
accelerated over the last 11 or so years by meaningful use. The 
thought we would digitize healthcare rapidly to improve care--
--
    Mr. Dunn. Everything is connected to everything.
    Dr. Dameff. Yes, and I think the commensurate security 
required for that did not happen, and did not occur. And so we 
are in a position now where we have a very difficult sector, 
generally a soft target for cyber attacks and ransomware.
    And then on top of that we have a lot of demands, 
especially over the last year. The COVID pandemic has spread 
thin many healthcare delivery organizations across this country 
and across the world. And as a consequence they are left 
juggling many different constraints, of which only 
cybersecurity is one of them.
    Mr. Dunn. Yes, and I would daresay that we are not paying 
as much attention to cybersecurity as we were before the 
pandemic. Everybody is a little tired, I appreciate that.
    In the interest of time, I am going to switch gears a bit 
here. You know, the U.S. Government confirmed just yesterday a 
mass ransomware attack on Microsoft earlier this year was done 
at the direction of the Chinese Government. However, even 
before this acknowledgment, anyone would be naive to believe 
that these recent ransomware attacks and cyber attacks are 
truly perpetuated by rogue criminal organizations within 
authoritarian China and Russia with no connection to or tacit 
permission from these authoritarian governments.
    So, Ms. Walden, Microsoft Research Asia, MSRA, located in 
Beijing, notes on their website, ``Technologies from MSRA have 
had a large influence within Microsoft and around the world, 
and new technologies are constantly born from MSRA. MSRA has 
achieved breakthrough results in many areas of basic applied 
computer research, and these results are transferred into 
Microsoft products.''
    Many experts, regulators around the world, have come to, I 
believe, the rightful conclusion there is no such thing as a 
private company in China, that virtually everything that 
happens in that country happens with at least the--if not the 
direction of the Communist Party.
    Do you believe that the fact that you are making these 
products in China makes them more or less vulnerable, more or 
less--or makes us more or less vulnerable?
    Yes, or--I mean, are we safer because of that? I don't 
think so.
    Ms. Walden. Well, thank you for the question. As you 
pointed out, there are challenges for doing business in China. 
And we--right? And we operate on an a zero-trust basis, and we 
operate with our values. We don't----
    Mr. Dunn. They can compel the----
    Ms. Walden. Right.
    Mr. Dunn [continuing]. Your information. I mean----
    Ms. Walden. We don't store--we store no data, no U.S. data, 
in China. And we operate on the principle of zero trust and 
secure that data.
    Mr. Dunn. But the code is also yours, right, and theirs. 
The codes you write, the software code you write, it is theirs 
as well as yours.
    Ms. Walden. For Chinese products and services. But I will 
tell you this. From an investigation point of view--and I am in 
the Digital Crimes Unit--we go after cyber criminals and their 
infrastructure wherever they may be, and that will include 
China or Russia or other unfriendly jurisdictions.
    Mr. Dunn. So, I--we are--run out of time, but I would say, 
I just--like most of us, I think, we are nervous about the fact 
that you are working so closely with the Chinese Government in 
China.
    I liked your comment on the cryptocurrency, by the way, and 
it looks more like a security than a currency.
    With that I yield----
    Ms. DeGette. The gentleman's time has expired. The Chair 
now recognizes Mr. Tonko for 5 minutes.
    Mr. Tonko. Thank you, Chair DeGette, and thank you for the 
hearing.
    Our government has an important role in ensuring the 
Nation's cybersecurity, especially related to critical 
infrastructure. I am sorry to say that high-profile government 
entities have also been victims of ransomware attacks 
themselves. In my district alone, the Albany airport, local 911 
systems, police departments, and the Albany City Government 
have all been among those who have been attacked. So, with many 
government agencies involved both as targets and as protective 
actors, I would like to try to get clarity from our witnesses 
today on just how the government can be better positioned to 
address this threat and help respond.
    So, Mr. Lee, can you first give us a sense of how it works 
now?
    When a critical infrastructure company is attacked with 
ransomware and they seek assistance from the Federal 
Government, who do they call? Which agencies get involved?
    And most importantly, what services does the government 
actually provide?
    Mr. Lee. Thank you. I think that the candid answer would be 
that there is a lot of confusion on who to call and how to 
actually organize that. And each government agency is most 
certainly helpful: CISA, FBI, DoD, so forth. They try to help 
out. But the expectation on the power company, energy company, 
and so forth, is that they have to talk to all of them. And 
there is a lot of confusion on what is actually going to come 
back as value.
    So, while there are good relationships, I think, 
ultimately, government would do better to be able to 
communicate with one face, also be able to handle .gov and the 
State and local agencies, as well, where there are a lot of 
cybersecurity issues, and then show the private sector what is 
working versus trying to go advocate for services and things to 
do that they may them not--they may themselves not be taking 
full advantage of.
    Mr. Tonko. So who should be that go-to, which face in 
government?
    Mr. Lee. I don't think most companies really care, but in 
my opinion it would be CISA. CISA is well established, as a 
civilian agency, to be the front door to government. That 
doesn't necessarily mean they are the ones that are going to do 
all the work, but to be the coordinator of the interagency 
process would be much more efficient.
    Mr. Tonko. Thank you.
    And Ms. Walden, you spent nearly a decade working on 
cybersecurity and other national security issues at the 
Department of Homeland Security. I heard your interaction with 
a couple of my colleagues on the subcommittee here. But as we 
consider solutions, are there more services that the government 
could provide that are currently either in short supply or not 
being provided at all?
    I heard you encouraging us to provide that full complement, 
but are there--those in short supply or not being done at all?
    Ms. Walden. I think--and I agree with Mr. Lee here--that 
there are services that the government can provide for free, 
frankly.
    I think what is in short supply are the resources, are the 
workforce, the persons that are able to provide the technical 
assistance that CISA is authorized to give to private-sector, 
non-Federal, and Federal entities. There is just a shortage of 
incident responders, of pen testers, of technical staff that 
are able to address these issues.
    But in terms of authority, legal authority, I think they 
are--they exist across the government. I think it is our--it is 
the government's job now to really use the full weight of those 
authorities that they have.
    Mr. Tonko. Thank you. And while it may sound reasonable to 
have one agency in charge, one concern is that each industry or 
sector has very specific circumstances and needs. One agency 
cannot be expected to understand perhaps all the complications 
of a ransomware attack against a power plant versus a hospital, 
for example. That is why we have sector-specific agencies to 
coordinate cyber info sharing with their industry and act as 
industry partners. Over the years, however, there have been 
some challenges about how such agencies coordinate with DHS.
    So, Mr. Reiner, what improvements can be made regarding 
coordination between DHS, sector-specific agencies, and the 
private sector to address the ransomware threats?
    Mr. Reiner. Mr. Tonko, I think one of the things that we 
have been most emphatic about, coming out of the Ransomware 
Task Force effort, is that there may well be--and I think 
Charles spoke to this earlier--there are efforts that are 
underway that are, actually, pretty phenomenal. There are folks 
and departments and agencies and companies and individuals that 
are out there that are fighting this every day, who are 
actually doing an incredible job. And we really need to commend 
them. But they need help.
    And one of the things that I think that Rob was alluding to 
is that having an interagency coordinated effort, where you 
have that one door to turn to when you need that help, would be 
immensely helpful. Our argument coming out of the task force is 
that really needs to be coordinated by the White House. The 
National Security Council really is in a unique position in 
order to coordinate all elements of national power in a way 
that, really, nobody else can.
    You can look at elements like the NCIJTF. You can look at 
the JCPO that has just been stood up in DHS. Those may be 
helpful in this regard, in terms of coordinating interagency 
assets. But really, at the end of the day, from our assertion, 
it has got to be out of the White House.
    Mr. Tonko. Thank you very much.
    And Mr. Lee, I would ask that you could also respond. I am 
out of time, but perhaps get word to the subcommittee.
    Thank you.
    Ms. DeGette. I thank the gentleman. The Chair now 
recognizes Mr. Palmer for 5 minutes.
    Mr. Palmer. Thank you, Madam Chairman. I want to take this 
a little different direction.
    We have talked a little bit about law enforcement, but on 
June 14th the heads of state with NATO--the NATO-allied 
countries met, and they issued a communique from Brussels and 
addressed the issue of the increasingly complex security 
environment that all these nations are dealing with. And they 
made this statement--they issued 79 statements--number 32, and 
I will summarize it, that the alliance is ``determined to 
deploy the full range of capabilities at all times to actively 
deter, defend against, and counter the full spectrum of cyber 
threats, including those conducted as part of hybrid campaigns, 
in accordance with international law.''
    But they reaffirm a decision as to when a cyber attack 
would lead to the invocation of article 5, which would be taken 
by NATO-allied nations on a case-by-case basis, and they said 
they recognize that the impact of significant, malicious, 
cumulative cyber activities might, in certain circumstances, be 
considered as amounting to an armed attack. That is pretty 
serious, and I think that is one of the things that we have 
kind of danced around, we really haven't addressed. We treat 
all these ransomware attacks as criminal activity, when they 
may not be exactly carried out by nation states, but in some 
cases--and I think, in particular, Russia and China--they are 
at least, if not sanctioned, approved.
    And Mr. Lee, I want to direct this to you because you have 
military background. We have tremendous capabilities in our 
military to address this. Does it make sense for us to 
counterattack, and particularly in some of the nations where 
the government is really a group of oligarchs with tremendous 
financial interests?
    Just--could you address that?
    Mr. Lee. Thank you for that question. I think most people 
in the military would generally like to not get to military 
force. We want to take all mechanisms available before we get 
there. And I think there are still plenty left.
    However, to directly address the question, I think that we 
do have to draw certain red lines of what we will and will not 
accept in this country, and how we are going to respond. And 
when I have looked at the messaging of NATO and others before 
on that topic, one of the challenges not only is that we don't 
specify what that red line is, but we don't tell anybody what 
we are going to do about it. And so it is not deterrence, it is 
strategic ambiguity.
    Mr. Palmer. That is----
    Mr. Lee. So if we are going to use military response, we 
better well define it.
    Mr. Palmer. Yes, I am not talking about an armed response. 
I am talking about in the cyber field, because they are 
attacking infrastructure. And I think our government may have a 
different definition of what is critical infrastructure than 
perhaps your organization does, and that is troubling to me. I 
don't think that we can allow these cumulative attacks to 
continue, when we know that there--these groups are giving safe 
harbor in these nations. There needs to be a price that has to 
be paid.
    I want to transition a little bit away from that, and Ms. 
Walden, I do appreciate what Microsoft is doing. You have 
really stepped up in terms of law enforcement. But I am just 
not sure that it is enough. And we have had this discussion 
about whether or not people should pay. And it was mentioned 
the percentage increase in ransomware attacks, and I just 
wonder if the fact that people have cyber insurance and we know 
that some of these ransomware--these hackers have hacked into 
these insurance companies and they know what certain groups are 
capable of paying, is the insurance helping or hurting?
    I mean, when they know that they have the ability to pay 
and they negotiate outside of law enforcement, is that helping 
or hurting?
    Ms. Walden. Well, quite frankly, I don't know if it is 
helping or hurting. I am not a cyber insurance expert. But I 
will say that there is a whole ecosystem out there that 
supports victims that are attacked by ransom. And cyber 
insurance companies are just part of that ecosystem. But 
whether they are helping or hurting, it is the victims that 
need to make the right business and operational decisions.
    Mr. Palmer. Well----
    Ms. Walden. I would hope that it means to not pay, but I 
can understand when they do pay.
    Mr. Palmer. Well, one of the things that is missing out on 
the task force website, and that is whether or not people 
should pay, and the whole issue of the insurance. That seems to 
be a pretty substantial omission.
    Could you address that, Mr. Reiner?
    Mr. Reiner. Yes, thank you for the question, Mr. Palmer. I 
think it really, at the end of the day, was the only item that 
the task force didn't come to a very specific recommendation 
on, in terms of why. I think there was a general leaning 
toward, I think, as my colleagues here have noted, making it so 
that the least amount of money is going to these criminals as 
possible and to devise a set of steps so that we could actually 
move in that direction.
    If we were to, for instance, want to prohibit payment now, 
the ecosystem is simply not ready. It is not prepared for that 
sort of injunction. So how can we get there?
    This--the report actually does lay out a number of steps, 
milestones, potentially, that could be taken on over the course 
of a couple of years to get us there. That is shoring up the 
defenses that we are working with, that is going after these 
criminals so that they don't act with such impunity. There is a 
good list of steps that need to be taken first, and then maybe 
we can move in that direction.
    Mr. Palmer. I thank the Chair, and I will submit the 
balance----
    Ms. DeGette. I thank the gentleman.
    Mr. Palmer [continuing]. Of my questions in writing.
    And I yield back.
    Ms. DeGette. I thank the gentleman. The Chair now 
recognizes Mr. Ruiz.
    Mr. Ruiz. Thank you very much, Chair. Today's hearing is 
focused on ransomware cyber attacks, which are becoming a 
growing and frequent threat to our businesses, utilities, and 
government agencies. Ransomware attacks have devastating 
consequences on their victims. A company or utility being 
locked out of its networks means lots--lost of time, lost 
money, and, in some cases, can also threaten the public's 
health and safety.
    In fact, I have visited Riverside County's Information 
Technology Center in my district to see what local governments 
are doing to combat cyber threats, and I have worked with 
California State University of San Bernardino to strengthen 
their cyber workforce teaching programs, and for improved 
pipeline workforce for our Nation.
    I would like to know more about what happens when a company 
suddenly finds its employees locked out of their computers due 
to ransomware, who they can turn to, and what more the 
government can do to help. So, Mr. Carmakal, I understand you 
are involved in incidence response at Mandiant. What do 
companies struggle with the most, or what are their barriers 
when faced with a ransomware attack?
    Mr. Carmakal. Thank you for the question, sir. So there is 
a lot of confusion in the early days of an incident.
    First of all, people don't actually know what actually 
occurred. Sometimes you can figure out that you are a victim of 
a cyber attack, because they see a ransom note that is deployed 
across all systems. When they see that note, a lot of times 
those--the victim organization may call a legal team to help 
them assess what to do next. They might call an incident 
response organization to help them investigate the intrusion. 
They may call their cybersecurity insurance provider to see 
whether or not the other third parties that they are engaging 
can be reimbursed. They may reach out to law enforcement.
    But within the first few days there is usually a lot of 
confusion, and everybody wants to get things back online as 
quickly as possible. They also want to assess what is the 
actual true impact of the incident. They want to understand 
whether or not data was stolen from the environment, and will 
that information show up on the internet down the road?
    And unfortunately, it is a very complex situation that 
often takes several days or several weeks to be able to 
investigate and to be able to recover the environment. Most 
organizations that deal with some kind of disruption, best-case 
scenario, they will be back online within a few days. Realistic 
scenario, it is going to take them a few weeks, possibly even 
months, to fully recover every system across the environment. 
Every situation is different, and there is usually a team of 
experts that victim organizations call in and ask for help.
    Mr. Ruiz. Thank you. Thank you.
    Mr. Reiner, as we have heard today, one of the most 
challenging decisions a company faces is whether or not to pay 
the ransom. In fact, whether or not to prohibit payments of 
ransom was the one key issue on which your Ransomware Task 
Force could not reach consensus. So can you please walk us 
through the considerations here?
    And what are the most important recommendations the task 
force made when it comes to prohibiting ransom payments, and 
how did you arrive at those priorities?
    Mr. Reiner. Thank you for the question. Yes, it was 
definitely a contentious discussion around this issue within 
the task force. And, as we laid down in the report, what we 
believe is probably the most appropriate way or the most 
effective way of approaching this is to have a set of steps 
that need to be taken in order to move in that direction, if 
that is what is chosen to be done, from a policy perspective.
    I think the conclusion of the task force was that, at this 
point, if you were to mandate the prohibition of payment, that 
it was just bad policy and that, again, a number of steps 
really need to be taken in order to move in that direction, one 
of which is to shore up defenses and get resources to companies 
and entities, municipalities, what have you, so that they can 
better defend themselves; take the fight to these ransomware 
actors in ways that we currently have not been doing, so they 
don't get to operate with such impunity; shoring up the cyber 
insurance market so that it actually is functioning in response 
to the level of threats that we are dealing with today.
    There is really--there's a number of steps that we think 
need to be undertaken, concurrently----
    Mr. Ruiz. Thank you.
    Mr. Reiner. Yes, sir.
    Mr. Ruiz. Dr. Dameff, like you, I am a trained physician, 
and I know firsthand the heavy reliance hospitals have on 
digital records and network infrastructure. But people aren't 
going to stop having medical emergencies or procedures, or 
practice medicine when their technology is taken away. What 
kind of procedures do hospitals need in order to be able to 
effectively operate during ransomware attack?
    For instance, should manual backup procedures exist for 
when electronic records and machines go down?
    How can a hospital practice paper backup for preparedness?
    And should those drills be included in accrediting bodies' 
criteria to be accredited?
    Dr. Dameff. I strongly support the preparation for 
hospitals to operate under ransomware attack in a manual 
fashion to the--to restore those systems as quickly as 
possible, but not to rely on them to deliver emergent care to 
patients that are still going to come in the front door, like 
you mentioned, still going to come into the emergency 
department. Whether or not it should be a portion or a 
prerequisite or a condition of hospital accreditation is a 
complicated one, depending on what level of preparation you are 
going to require of a particular hospital.
    What I can say is that there are current processes in place 
that are required of every hospital to be prepared for all 
hazards, things like earthquakes and hurricanes, for which 
cybersecurity disasters--truly, these could be disastrous 
consequences for hospitals--should be incorporated, and should 
be prioritized because, generally speaking, cybersecurity 
attacks--sorry, cybersecurity and cyber attacks--can hit any 
hospital without geographic predilection or precondition.
    What am I trying to say here is that every hospital needs 
to take this seriously. Every hospital should prepare for 
taking care of sick patients without the Electronic Health 
Record and other technical systems. Any preparation efforts for 
that should be supported, standardized, studied, and spread 
across the country.
    Mr. Ruiz. Thank you very much.
    Ms. DeGette. I thank the gentleman. The Chair now 
recognizes Mr. Joyce for 5 minutes.
    Mr. Joyce. Thank you, Chairwoman DeGette and Ranking Member 
Griffith, for holding today's hearing on the growing threat of 
ransomware.
    All too often we see our Nation's critical infrastructure 
being attacked from nefarious actors, exposing our 
vulnerabilities and ultimately harming our citizens. As a 
doctor, I am aware of the growing importance of securing 
patients' personal identifiable information and medical 
records. This body must take a proactive approach to strengthen 
all critical infrastructure and ensure that all Americans' 
medical data is safe from those who choose to do harm.
    Dr. Dameff, let's continue the discussion. In your 
experience, when a hospital or a healthcare system is the 
victim of a ransomware attack, how long are their systems down? 
Is it days? Is it weeks? Has it gone on for months?
    Dr. Dameff. Great question. We have seen the entire gamut. 
And it doesn't necessarily always match with how prepared they 
were. It depends often on who the adversary is, what they 
particularly deployed.
    But one thing I will say is that we need to study this 
because, looking at the latest headlines, it seems like cyber 
attacks are increasing in sophistication, frequency, and, 
potentially, increasing downtimes. I see more a trend towards 
weeks to months than I do days, insofar as these devastating 
attacks are more impactful and would result in a longer 
downtime.
    Mr. Joyce. So in this recovery response timeline after a 
cyber attack, does the healthcare system revert to manual 
patient care systems?
    You said something that is somewhat frightening to me. You 
said you are a generation of doctors who have never used paper 
charts or have never written a prescription. As one of the five 
physicians on this committee here today talking to you, that is 
frightening to me. How do we respond?
    Dr. Dameff. I think that it is key that we incorporate 
cybersecurity training and preparation into the next generation 
of medical education.
    Mr. Joyce. Would that include paper?
    Dr. Dameff. I do. I do think that physicians should be 
trained to operate in conditions that do not have technology, 
or to rely on less connected technological backups as a stopgap 
measure for patient care.
    Mr. Joyce. When talking about ways to prevent or mitigate 
the effects of a cyber attack on healthcare systems, some 
individuals talk about the cloud or having a system backed up. 
Are these ultimately foolproof ways to ensure that a hospital 
system or a healthcare provider does not have to pay the 
ransom, or the ransomware attack, or that patients are less 
impacted?
    Dr. Dameff. I think that this trend towards centralization 
of medical device management, for example, or electronic health 
records into the cloud is a trend we are not going to see 
change.
    I would defer to the specific security protections offered 
by such cloud architecture to other members of the panel, as it 
is not my expertise. But I will say that it is a two-edged 
sword, if you will. The centralization of these into the cloud 
means that a single attack on a cloud provider offering 
services to many hospitals across the country, if attacked, 
could impact all of them at once.
    So that being said, many hospitals are not well equipped to 
defend their systems, as it is. So do you offer increased 
protections from the cloud more so than you would at individual 
hospitals, taking the risk that, if that particular cloud 
provider went down, you know, hundreds of hospitals could be 
hit?
    This is something we are going to have to figure out, and, 
quite frankly, we do not have the data to make that decision 
currently.
    Mr. Joyce. Dr. Dameff, I would be remiss if I did not reach 
out and thank emergency physicians, emergency nurses, emergency 
technicians as we have faced a pandemic and as you continue to 
face the ransomware attacks that are occurring in the medical 
community. As someone who previously worked at Johns Hopkins 
Bayview Emergency Department, I have great respect for the work 
that you continue in the face of this pandemic, and I think I 
acknowledge that today and thank you.
    Madam Chair, I remain--I yield my remaining few seconds.
    Ms. DeGette. Thank you, Mr. Joyce. And I think that the 
entire panel and the entire Congress would echo your 
sentiments, thanking----
    Mr. Joyce. Thank you, Chair DeGette.
    Ms. DeGette [continuing]. Emergency room personnel. Thank 
you.
    The Chair now is pleased to recognize Mr. Peters for 5 
minutes.
    Mr. Peters. Thank you, Madam Chair. Thanks to the witnesses 
for being here.
    Dr. Dameff, you have got all the questions, but you are 
from San Diego, so I just have to ask you a couple.
    First of all, thanks for your great work.
    And just down the street from you, a major hospital system 
suffered this very attack, and I assume will--as they ease out 
of that, or as they climb out of that, we will learn more about 
what protocols could be.
    I have heard you talk about making sure that, in the 
aftermath of an attack, that hospitals are prepared to operate 
without their technology, also to define protocols that 
hospitals might be able to rely on to prepare to defend 
themselves against these hacks.
    One question I just haven't had--you haven't--heard you 
answer, and forgive me if I missed it, but should we be 
disconnected a little bit more?
    I have often wondered if there is a way to take a unit like 
a hospital and to have some sort of way to fence it off so that 
they can operate internally in a connected way without being so 
exposed. And that may be a question for you or for some of the 
people on the panel, but I am curious about that.
    Dr. Dameff. I do believe we should invest in technology 
that limits the exposure of hospitals. Traditionally speaking, 
as I mentioned previously, hospitals are soft targets. They 
generally have flat networks, meaning that they are often 
employing the best practices for network segmentation. And as a 
consequence, they are more at risk for rapid spread of 
ransomware, for example.
    So this concept of isolating critical sections of the 
hospital and being able to rely on those systems without risk 
of ransomware would require a lot of those technological 
solutions. They are costly and, as mentioned previously, there 
are a lot of healthcare systems that will not have the ability 
to deploy such technology without resources and additional 
guidance.
    And so, for that, I would encourage that type of isolation. 
But I fear we are not going to get to it. Instead, I think we 
are, unfortunately, going to have to rely on just preparing for 
an inevitable attack and limiting the damage to patient care 
while we wait for system restoration.
    Mr. Peters. And also deploying defined protocols or best 
practices, I guess, as it would be--maybe we could help define.
    You know, I appreciate that. And I also wanted to follow up 
on comments from questions from the Chair and from Ms. 
Schakowsky about what the duty is of private organizations to 
take care of their stuff.
    You know, I thought a lot about Equifax--not to pick on any 
particular company--but there is a company that is performing a 
public function with a lot of private data. And it seemed to me 
that the loss of that data to the malefactors really didn't hit 
their bottom line. And so I have often wondered if the 
companies that do this kind of work--sort of like, in a way, 
providing a public service--are appropriately incentivized to 
take care of that data.
    Maybe, Ms. Walden, I would direct this to you. Your 
testimony said that we should make sure that companies make it 
harder to get in, limit the scope of damage, and prepare for 
the worst. I guess--do you believe that companies are 
appropriately--to incentivize on--from the bottom line to take 
care of individuals' data, or is that something that the 
government has to define better?
    Ms. Walden. First, as a victim of the OPM breach years 
ago----
    Mr. Peters. OPM, and the DNC, but I changed my cell phone 
number. That is a different situation----
    Ms. Walden. Those are different situations. But I do think 
that companies need to be held to a standard to protect private 
data. But these cyber attacks are more than just about data 
leakage, right? They are interrupting business operations.
    Mr. Peters. Right.
    Ms. Walden. And I do think that there is a role for the 
private sector in making sure that they prevent these criminal 
actors from getting into their systems in the first place. 
There are some very simple things that can take place that we 
described here: multifactor authentication, patching your 
software, et cetera.
    But all that is to say is--I think we need to raise the 
collective security of critical infrastructure owners and 
operators, and we--we need to put the onus on both the 
government, to protect the critical infrastructure, and the 
private sector that owns and operates the critical 
infrastructure----
    Mr. Peters. Don't get me wrong. I actually, really, am a 
believer that the private sector has the--is the appropriate 
place for these solutions to be investigated and developed. 
What I don't--what I am--just to make sure that I am clear, is 
that I am not sure that companies are incentivized in a way 
that would make them deploy the best practices.
    So, even if we knew what those best practices were, even if 
we defined them from sector to sector, what is going to make 
the next company who has got private information invest in 
that, knowing that maybe the loss of that information doesn't 
directly affect their bottom line?
    Ms. Walden. I would agree. I think many companies aren't 
properly incentivized to protect their data.
    Mr. Peters. I am out of my--I am out of time. I would just 
suggest that we might want to think about defining a duty of 
care in a piece of legislation that would just make sure that 
everyone is properly noticed that they have to do the right 
thing.
    And Madam Chair, with that I yield back.
    Ms. DeGette. I thank the gentleman. The Chair now 
recognizes Ms. Schrier for 5 minutes.
    Ms. Schrier. Thank you, Madam Chair, and thank you to our 
witnesses.
    When we hear the term ``ransomware,'' we often think of 
high-dollar ransoms and large companies. But, as all of you 
pointed out, individuals and communities are also affected by 
these attacks when they can't get gas to go to work, when their 
school or local hospital is impacted by an attack, or when 
their own data is compromised.
    I have heard from local hospitals about the immense cost 
and manpower it takes to try to harden a whole system to 
prevent a cyber attack--with my hospital, who is training up a 
workforce to not fall prey to phishing, and then to recruit and 
hire the best and brightest in cybersecurity, as you mentioned.
    Dr. Dameff, I can tell you, from common experience, that 
just a few hours of power outage completely handicapped my 
ability to take care of patients, so I can only imagine how 
this sort of thing would impact a hospital, especially for days 
on end. And you already described for my colleague, Mr. 
Griffith, how those impacts on patient care may be felt more 
acutely in lesser-resourced and rural hospitals. Could you be a 
little bit more specific about how sister hospitals, if there 
even are sister hospitals, local entities, private-sector 
actors, and the Federal Government could better support 
specifically those healthcare systems, so that they have the 
resources they need?
    Dr. Dameff. Thank you so much for that question.
    I think the first and most important thing is the 
preparatory efforts to prevent and then mitigate the impacts of 
those attacks. So, looking at your particular geographic area, 
and understanding where are the linchpin hospitals, right? 
Which ones are providing trauma services? Which ones are stroke 
centers?
    These types of specialized hospitals, who take care of 
hyper acute patient care, should be identified early and 
prioritized for that type of preparation, as well as resources 
to ensure that, when they do go down or when they are attacked, 
they are able to fail gracefully as much as possible, while 
still taking care of patients. So there is a preparatory step 
in that.
    Second, in the response phase of this, I think it is common 
for a hospital to reach out to law enforcement early. I think 
that has been a pretty common theme, in that they will reach 
out to the FBI to help with investigatory efforts and response. 
But whether or not that type of communication transcends to 
other government agencies such as CISA or the FDA, even if 
medical devices are involved, can sometimes be--not happen.
    And so I think that is partly the responsibility of a 
particular hospital but also of the bodies that accredit 
hospitals as well as local public health authorities in being 
able to quickly propagate meaningful metrics of patient care to 
authorities that can help, who can bring resources in the hour 
of need to help hospitals still take care of patients while 
addressing that.
    Ms. Schrier. That is----
    Dr. Dameff. So that type of interagency communication is 
lacking.
    Ms. Schrier. That is really helpful. And I know, in 
Washington State, our Washington State Hospital Association 
does these kinds of drills with hospitals to help them prepare.
    And then, speaking of incentives, I know a hospital's 
reputation is really integral to its ability to serve the 
public. It seems like one of the things we need to communicate 
to the public is that, even with the best preparation, these 
attacks are so common that you can still be hit. Do you think 
that is a role for public--you know, for the government, for 
the private sector, to kind of communicate this to the public?
    Dr. Dameff. The communication--oh, thank you very much--the 
communication of that is rather difficult.
    I have always said that there should be no competitive 
advantage in healthcare cybersecurity, right? There should 
never be billboards saying, ``Come to our hospital, we didn't 
have this happen,'' because, quite frankly, I would agree with 
you that, because of increased--the sophistication of these 
types of attacks, no one is immune from this. No healthcare 
organization is immune, regardless of their cybersecurity 
budget.
    So at the end of the day, I think communicating that it is 
an unfortunate consequence of the hyperconnectivity of 
healthcare, that there are steps being done and resources 
provided to hospitals to prepare and mitigate that is key, 
while still trying to restore trust in consumers and how they 
approach a particular hospital for healthcare.
    Ms. Schrier. Thank you.
    Dr. Dameff. That is key. That is really important.
    Ms. Schrier. I have one last question for Mr. Reiner.
    Now, I appreciate your comments about our country not 
really being quite at the right place to be able to prohibit 
payment of ransoms, even though that might slow or stop these 
cyber attacks. So, for now, what can companies do, for example, 
to have duplicate systems, a wall between them so that they 
could recover afterwards, maybe without paying the ransom?
    Mr. Reiner. So one of the pieces that we haven't really 
discussed here today, outside of some of the elements of what 
companies can be doing to prepare, is to actually--what we 
discovered through our process is that a lot of companies 
actually don't have a plan. They actually haven't vetted out, 
at the executive level, what to do, whether or not to pay. And 
they have companies that they can turn to that can help them 
through that process, whether it is their insurance company, or 
a forensics company, or some of the folks on the panel here 
with me today.
    But actually having that in place ahead of time, companies 
do tabletop this. They do exercise against it, but not all of 
them. And I think that is a resource that everyone should have 
in hand, to have a checklist, to have an actual plan to help 
make you make that decision if you do get hit.
    Ms. Schrier. Thank you very much. I yield back.
    Ms. DeGette. I thank the gentlelady. The Chair now 
recognizes Mrs. Trahan for 5 minutes.
    Mrs. Trahan. Well, thank you, Chairwoman DeGette, for this 
important, certainly informative, and timely hearing.
    The threat that hackers pose to businesses and institutions 
is so real, and the increasing frequency and severity of the 
attacks is deeply disturbing. You know, like so many of my 
colleagues and the panelists testifying today, I am concerned 
that cyber attacks are becoming especially commonplace within 
critical public service sectors, ranging from healthcare to 
education. In fact, a public university in my district was 
recently hit by a cyber attack that shut down operations for a 
week.
    Ransomware has become one of the most attractive tools for 
criminals because of how lucrative it can be, often without 
much effort. And hackers find vulnerable caches of critical 
data being stored by organizations like hospitals, schools, and 
sometimes even local governments and then use ransomware to 
effectively lock the organization out of their own data until 
they agree to pay up.
    Now, what has become clear is that improving our cyber 
defenses is not enough to combat this threat. We need to, you 
know, find ways to disrupt the ability of criminals to demand 
and receive ransom payments without consequence.
    The Internet has allowed for ransoms to be paid remotely 
through digital gift cards and, of course, cryptocurrency such 
as Bitcoin. So, Ms. Walden, could you just explain what it is 
about cryptocurrencies that make them the chosen method of 
payment for ransoms in this type of cyber crime?
    Ms. Walden. Yes, and thank you for that question.
    So cryptocurrency, the technology underlying 
cryptocurrency, blockchain technology, allows for a transparent 
payment system that is decentralized and distributed, and it 
allows for, at the same time, pseudoanonymity. It is a 
complicated word to say for me, but that essentially means 
that, while you can track the transaction and you can see 
exactly, you know, the hops of money from one wallet to 
another, the on-ramps and the off-ramps, you can't necessarily 
see the persons behind the transaction. You can't see the 
person that owns the wallet.
    So that is one thing that makes it attractive. The other is 
that the transactional costs in the crypto economy are much 
lower than in the traditional fiat economy. So central banking 
systems are just more expensive.
    Mrs. Trahan. Sure.
    Ms. Walden. And then, finally, the third thing is that it 
is difficult to trace--not impossible, but it is difficult to 
trace. So--but it is--and it is borderless. So you can have 
money move quickly and effectively across borders. There is no 
central banking authority that sort of maps it out. And the use 
of Bitcoin, in particular, is prevalent because it is the most 
widely used currency, virtual currency. It is easy to get, it 
is liquid----
    Mrs. Trahan. Yes.
    Ms. Walden. And victims can--can easily put that into the 
system.
    Mrs. Trahan. Yes. And you----
    Ms. Walden. I hope that answered your question.
    Mrs. Trahan. Yes, it definitely did, and it is great to 
have that thorough answer on the record, because an oft-cited 
rationale for the use of cryptocurrency is the lack of 
visibility into parties conducting transactions and a lack of 
clarity regarding government relations.
    And so, Mr. Reiner, I am wondering, you know, if you could 
answer this question. You know, cryptocurrency exchanges 
operate in the United States. They are subject to certain 
regulations. But, clearly, there are opportunities to expand 
the applicability and/or enforcement of those regulations. And 
if so, if you agree with that statement, you know, what 
specifically do you recommend?
    Mr. Reiner. I would agree with that, and thank you for the 
question.
    I think the task force, as it came together, recommended a 
number of steps that could be taken to--and I think it is 
important to note here that the task force's position on this 
wasn't necessarily that cryptocurrency is the problem, right? 
Cryptocurrency is something that I think can add value to--in a 
number of different ways, but that, in this instance, it is 
something that is being abused.
    There are a number of steps that could be taken to pull 
elements of the cryptocurrency ecosystem into existing 
regulatory regimes, whether that is expanding the application 
of know-your-customer rules, the anti-money-laundering rules 
that are already available.
    I think, to your--to the nature of your question, though, 
something that is incredibly important here is some of this is 
outside of U.S. jurisdiction, and so there--and we need to be 
working very closely with international partners so that they 
can be taking these steps with actors in their spaces to do the 
same thing.
    I think a number of the actors that we engaged with through 
the Ransomware Task Force process made it very clear that that 
is a conversation they want to be a part of, to positively 
contribute in that direction. I think there is real opportunity 
there.
    Mrs. Trahan. Great. Well, thank you. I am out of time. I 
will submit the rest of my questions for the record.
    Thank you, Madam Chair.
    Ms. DeGette. I thank the gentlelady. The Chair now 
recognizes Mr. O'Halleran for 5 minutes.
    Mr. O'Halleran. Thank you, Madam Chair and the ranking 
member, for today's hearing.
    You know, securing the infrastructure for America is 
critical. We are all in agreement with that. I haven't seen 
anything today that would tell me that we aren't. Issues like 
Colonial Pipeline, how many more times do we have to see this 
occur and not get serious about this? Year after year after 
year, something comes up, where this becomes an issue. And now 
it is a critical issue, in my mind, for--and I know the 
doctors' minds--for the health and welfare of the people of 
America.
    Big companies have tons of cyberspace security, and even 
they are attacked frequently. Should we hope and pray that we 
won't be targeted, or should we do something about this?
    In Arizona we are facing record heat and droughts every 
year. I am concerned what would happen to vulnerable 
populations, especially older Americans, if our power, water 
utilities, and others went down. Our families could be left 
without running water or power for days, weeks, who knows, as 
new developments and technologies occur. I hope we can learn 
from today that this has to be a priority for our businesses in 
America and our government.
    Ms. Walden, I am sure you agree that we need to do more to 
disrupt ransomware. You said in your testimony that Microsoft 
is working to make ransomware less profitable and more 
difficult to employ. What does that mean? What are you doing?
    Ms. Walden. Thank you for the question. As you aptly 
pointed out, there is an imbalance, right, that allows 
ransomware to proliferate: one, it is a highly profitable 
crime; second, there is--there are few barriers to entry. I 
could get into the crime of ransomware, and I haven't coded 
since 1985. So it is just off balance.
    And so our opportunity at Microsoft is to disrupt its 
scale. And what does that mean? That means that we go after the 
infrastructure. So we go after payment systems that support the 
profitability, and we disrupt that. But we also make it harder 
for our products and services to be used to proliferate 
ransomware. And we make the entry of the criminal to--more 
difficult, right?
    So that means tearing down payment systems where we can, or 
the ability for ransomware actors to receive payment. And that 
means tearing down negotiation opportunities between the 
ransomware criminal gang and the victim. That means disrupting 
their ability to easily commit this crime. And that also means, 
from a threat actor perspective, working closely with our law 
enforcement partners to bring justice to these criminals that 
propagate the crime.
    Mr. O'Halleran. Thank you very much for that answer.
    Mr. Carmakal, what type of information sharing is there 
between private sector and the U.S. Government when it comes to 
attacks on businesses?
    And how do we recommend--or you recommend--we can improve 
this?
    It is obvious from today that there's a lot of areas where 
information sharing does not go on. And I don't know how this 
whole system works if we don't share that information. Mr. 
Carmakal, please.
    Mr. Carmakal. Yes, thank you, sir. I think there is an 
opportunity for us to do a better job of sharing information 
between victim organizations and the rest of the world. But 
they need to do it in a way where they don't feel like they are 
going to be penalized for having a data security incident.
    There is a common trend of victims becoming a second victim 
because of public shaming by other organizations, by the 
general public when there is a cybersecurity incident. So we 
need to create an opportunity and facilitate a way for victim 
organizations to be able to share information about active 
attacks, about compromises with some central governing body or 
some agency that is able to disseminate that information in a 
quick and actionable way.
    A lot of times when we see threat actors operate, they 
conduct intrusions at dozens of organizations at the same time. 
And if we are able to take information from one victim 
organization and share it with the community, it helps us 
disrupt threat actors, helps us increase the cost of threat 
actor operations, and I think that is one of the many ways in 
which we could all take collective actions to curb this 
problem.
    Mr. O'Halleran. I thank you.
    And Madam Chair, I just don't believe that we are going to 
get the type of process moving forward that we truly need as a 
nation without clearly identifying how we are going to 
communicate with one another in this area, whatever privacy 
laws have to be placed or whatever has to be done to allow 
people to be able to talk to one another.
    So with that, I yield.
    Ms. DeGette. Thank you. I thank the gentleman.
    The committee has a storied tradition of allowing members 
of the full committee to question. And that is particularly 
useful today because we have our resident technology expert 
with us, Mr. McNerney. So I am pleased to recognize him for 5 
minutes.
    Mr. McNerney. Well, I thank the Chair for the hearing and 
the witnesses for your testimony. I thank the Chair and the 
ranking member for allowing me to waive on this morning--or 
this afternoon now.
    Cybersecurity defenses are primarily intended to safeguard 
organizations' IT systems, but many critical sectors are 
relying on OT systems such as SCADA systems and PLCs to operate 
machinery or industrial controls.
    OT system attacks are increasing in severity and frequency. 
For instance, the case of Colonial Pipeline attack, the company 
proactively shut down its OT systems in response to ransomware 
attacks on its IT system. Mr. Lee, how serious and widespread 
is the ransomware threat on OT systems?
    Mr. Lee. Thank you for that question. It is significantly 
more frequent than people would realize. There's, you know, 
some weeks that we go where we might have five different 
incident response cases on just OT systems that never go 
public.
    And so I think, you know, I agree with a lot of the 
recommendations around removing the stigma around this. But 
also, we have to make sure that there is value back to those 
organizations. So there is a lot of desire of you must 
communicate to the government. But if there is no value back to 
those organizations in doing that, it is just not a top 
priority.
    Mr. McNerney. Well, is there any government support for 
companies in dealing with live OT threats?
    Mr. Lee. I think that, while there are many great Members 
in the government and there is some expertise there, I would 
say that the OT cybersecurity expertise is very much more in 
the private sector than in government, and it is very nascent 
in the government to be able to handle that.
    I would say, from a policy position, we should probably 
more proactively partner with those folks doing that work and 
make sure that we remove those barriers to get things like 
visibility in those systems. I think it was mentioned 
previously that you almost benefit when you have ransomware by 
the fact that you know it. There's a lot of these cases that 
people just simply don't know that they are getting 
compromised.
    Mr. McNerney. Thank you.
    Mr. Carmakal, over the years in your career you have helped 
organizations across the globe respond to some of the most 
catastrophic cybersecurity attacks and insurance instances. 
Based on your experience, what risks will ransomware attacks on 
OT systems pose?
    And how can the potential victim organizations best protect 
themselves?
    Mr. Carmakal. Yes, and thank you for the question, sir. 
Ransomware attacks against operational technology systems have 
the potential to be incredibly devastating. We had the 
potential to see true kinetic responses and impacts that 
everyday people may be able to observe. And so there is 
certainly a risk and a threat there.
    Generally speaking, a lot of organizations, they struggle 
to think about security from an operational technology 
perspective. Part of that challenge is with governance. A lot 
of times the person that is responsible for cybersecurity 
doesn't always have the governance and authority to be able to 
apply cybersecurity protocols and policies on operational 
technology environments. A lot of times it is the business 
owner or the asset owner that is responsible for cybersecurity. 
And a lot of times those asset owners don't actually have 
cybersecurity experience. And so there's some fundamental 
challenges that are out there.
    I think we need to continue to focus on operational 
technology security. There is a lot of potential real-world 
impact that can occur there. And I think it is a natural 
evolution of the threat that we are seeing today.
    Mr. McNerney. Thank you.
    And Mr. Lee, what role can the public-private partnerships 
that the administration announced in April play in shoring up 
some of these vulnerabilities in OT systems?
    Mr. Lee. Yes, the very first thing is partnership with the 
sector, but more specifically in actually understanding what 
the sectors need.
    A great example: There was many things recommended here 
today about patching and phishing, you know, training and 
similar, that are absolutely appropriate in the enterprise, and 
they would make a top-10 list in operations technology 
security. There's a lot of enterprise security people that come 
into operations environments thinking that the playbook that 
they run in IT is what they should do in OT. And there have 
been more power outages in the United States to people patching 
systems than Russia, China, and Iran combined.
    So when we look at OT, we need to make sure that the 
government partners understand: How do you operate a gas plant 
different than a nuclear power plant? What do you need to see 
in these standards, other than just what we think best 
practices are from a higher level?
    Mr. McNerney. Thank you.
    Mr. Reiner, thank you for the recommendations from the IST. 
The discussion today has been entirely focused on attacks on 
institutions. I am a little curious about attacks on 
individuals. Are those attacks continuing to escalate, as they 
are?
    Is there any resource in the government for people that 
need help in that situation?
    Mr. Reiner, you want to answer that?
    Mr. Reiner. I think the preponderance of--I mean, this is a 
profit-driven enterprise, and so the attackers are looking for 
those--they do their research, they do their analysis to find 
those that are not only the most vulnerable but are going to be 
the most lucrative. And I don't really think that they 
necessarily discriminate, per se.
    I personally am not as familiar with attacks that are 
targeted against individuals, as much as they are against 
organizations, which has the large attack surface that can be 
taken advantage of, et cetera, and that has the resources, 
actually, to pay these ransoms that these criminals are really 
looking for.
    Mr. McNerney. OK, thank you. I yield back.
    Ms. DeGette. I thank the gentleman, and I really want to 
thank again all of our witnesses for participating in today's 
hearing. It was a really excellent--both the ranking member and 
I agreed, it was an excellent panel, gave us a lot of good 
information. And we will be following up with all of you on 
your recommendations.
    I want to remind Members that, pursuant to committee rules, 
they have 10 business days to submit their additional questions 
for the record to be answered by the witnesses who have 
appeared. And I would ask the witnesses to please agree to 
respond promptly to any of those questions that you might 
receive, because they will be very helpful to us in developing 
further legislation and approaches.
    Also, the ranking member and I would like to insert into 
the record by unanimous consent a report on cybersecurity by 
the E&C Republican staff dated December 7, 2018.
    And without objection, it is ordered.
    [The information appears at the conclusion of the hearing.]
    Ms. DeGette. And with that, the subcommittee is adjourned.
    [Whereupon, at 1:11 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
    [Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]
    [GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
    

                                 [all]

